1
Online Learning of Modular Bayesian Deep Receivers:
Single-Step Adaptation with Streaming Data
Yakov Gusakov, Osvaldo Simeone, Tirza Routtenberg, and Nir Shlezinger
Abstract—Deep neural network ( DNN)-based receivers offer a
powerful alternative to classical model-based designs for wireless
communication, especially in complex and nonlinear propagation
environments. However , their adoption is challenged by the rapid
variability of wireless channels, which makes pre-trained static DNN-
based receivers ineffective, and by the latency and computational
burden of online stochastic gradient descent ( SGD)-based learning.
In this work, we propose an online learning framework that enables
rapid low-complexity adaptation of DNN-based receivers. Our
approach is based on two main tenets. First, we cast online learning
as Bayesian tracking in parameter space, enabling a single-step
adaptation, which deviates from multi-epoch SGD. Second, we focus
on modular DNN architectures that enable parallel, online, and
localized variational Bayesian updates. Simulations with practical
communication channels demonstrate that our proposed online
learning framework can maintain a low error rate with markedly
reduced update latency and increased robustness to channel
dynamics as compared to traditional gradient descent based method.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Context and Motivation
The increasing demand for wireless data motivates the
integration of emerging technologies such as massive and
holographic multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) [2] and
reconfigurable intelligent surfaces [3]. While these innovations
expand the capacity and functionality of next-generation
networks, they also substantially complicate receiver design,
challenging the applicability of classical model-based signal
processing techniques [4], [5]. A promising direction to cope
with such complexity is the incorporation of artificial intelligence
(AI) tools, and particularly deep neural networks ( DNNs), into
the receiver chain [6]. By learning to infer from data, deep
receivers offer a model-agnostic alternative that can operate
effectively in unknown and nonlinear environments [7], [8].
Despite their promise, the deployment of deep receivers
in practical wireless systems is subject to two fundamental
constraints [9]: (i) wireless channels are inherently time-varying,
implying that a suitable mapping learned by a DNN during
training may quickly become outdated; and (ii) wireless devices
typically operate under stringent constraints on computation,
Parts of this work were presented at the 2025 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) as the paper [1]. Y . Gusakov,
T. Routtenberg, and N. Shlezinger are with the School of ECE, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Be’er-Sheva, Israel (e-mail: gusakovy@post.bgu.ac.il,
{tirzar; nirshl}@bgu.ac.il). O. Simeone is with the Institute for Intelligent
Networked Systems, Northeastern University London, One Portsoken Street,
London, E1 8PH, UK (email: o.simeone@northeastern.edu). This work was
supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon Europe Programme under the ERC starting grant nr. 101163973
(FLAIR) and by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 3314/25). The work
of O. Simeone was supported by the ERC under the European Union’s Horizon
Europe Programme (grant agreement No. 101198347), by an Open Fellowship
of the EPSRC (EP/W024101/1), and by the EPSRC project (EP/X011852/1).
Fig. 1. Illustration of proposed framework for single-step online adaptation
of modular Bayesian deep receivers
memory, and energy consumption. The first constraint motivates
training deep receivers on-device, while the second constraint
poses a challenge for standard deep learning algorithms, which
are typically data- and compute-intensive [10].
Two main paradigms are considered for incorporating deep
learning into the physical layer of wireless receivers. The
first relies on offline pre-trained DNNs, inheriting a common
framework in traditional deep learning domains such as
computer vision and natural language processing. These models
are typically trained over large datasets encompassing diverse
channel realizations, aiming to learn mappings that generalize
across multiple environments viajoint learning[7], [11].
Some level of adaptivity can be achieved with pre-trained mod-
els usingensemble-based architectures[12], which maintain a set
of specialized DNNs for different conditions; conventional linear
channel estimates as additional inputs in inference [13], [14]; or
hypernetworks that alter the DNN mapping based on an external
DNN [15], [16]. Despite their simplicity in deployment, these
approaches tend to produce highly parameterized models with ele-
vated memory and compute requirements, limiting their feasibility
for edge devices. Moreover, such pre-trained receivers struggle to
generalize to unseen channel distributions without explicit adapta-
tion, and often incur latency due to large inference pipelines [17].
An alternative paradigm to using pre-trained models
employsonline learning, wherein the deep receiver is
adapted continuously using data from the current operating
conditions [10]. This enables adaptation to channel variations,
maximizing performance by tailoring the receiver to the
instantaneous channel distribution. However, online training
with conventional deep learning methods is often impractical in
wireless devices due to computational constraints and the lack
of abundant labeled data. Real-time updates require significant
processing power and memory, while pilots offer limited
arXiv:2511.06045v2  [eess.SP]  24 May 2026
=== PAGE BREAK ===
2
samples that may be insufficient for effective training.
In this work, we introduce a novel online learning paradigm for
deep learning-aided wireless receivers, illustrated in Fig. 1, which
jointly leverages two complementary principles: (i) modular de-
signs of the receiver architecture; and (ii) Bayesian DNNs. While
modularity and Bayesian learning have each independently shown
promise in facilitating efficient AI-aided receivers, we combine
them into a unified framework forrapid adaptationinspired by
recent advances in continual Bayesian learning [18]–[20]. The
key conceptual insight of our approach is to cast the task of online
training as the tracking of a dynamic system in the parameter
space [21], where statistical observations stem from received pilot
signals. This formulation enables the application of recursive
Bayesian filtering methods to online learning, facilitating single-
step updates in response to time-varying channel dynamics.
B. Related Work
The complexity of online adaptation can be partially tackled
by using several complementary approaches. These include archi-
tectures that integrate domain knowledge to yield compact and
modular designs that reduce training complexity [22]–[24]; meta-
learning techniques for optimizing the hyperparameters of the
learning algorithm [25], [26]; and the incorporation of change de-
tection mechanisms [27] to identify when retraining is necessary.
To obtain training data for online adaptation, it was proposed
to exploit the structure of communication protocols [28], [29]
and modulation schemes [30] for self-supervision. This approach
can be combined with targeted data augmentation [31], [32]
to obtain labeled data. Moreover, Bayesian learning tools were
proposed to avoid overfitting with limited data [33]–[35], and
their improved calibration was shown to be highly effective
when combined with modular deep architectures, enabling
improved generalization and performance [36].
Yet, a central bottleneck persists: nearly all existing methods
rely on stochastic gradient descent ( SGD) or its variants, which
necessitate multiple passes over data and slow convergence.
These characteristics make them ill-suited for scenarios where
channel conditions evolve rapidly and adaptation must occur
within the order of a coherence block of a wireless channel.
This gives rise to the need for novel online learning mechanisms
that can perform effective updates, by potentially deviating
from conventional and widely-accepted SGD-based learning.
C. Main Contributions
In this work, we propose a low-latency, high-performance
online training algorithm for deep receivers based on Bayesian
training and modular architectures. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows:
•Online learning as Bayesian tracking:We cast the
online training of deep receivers as a Bayesian tracking
task over a dynamic system defined by the evolving DNN
parameters via variational learning [37]. This enables the
principled application of recursive Bayesian estimation
tools, which are well-suited for low-latency adaptation in
dynamic environments.
•Natural-gradient-based online Bayesian learning:We
adapt online Bayesian learning algorithms grounded in
natural-gradient approximations to implement online
learning via Bayesian tracking.
• Complexity-aware streaming modular adaptation:We
integrate the proposed Bayesian learning techniques with
modular deep receivers to supportmodule-wiseBayesian
updates, and treat channel outputs asstreaming datato
enable Bayesian learning in a pipelined and asynchronous
manner, leading to scalable, fast, and localized online
training with minimal overhead.
•Extensive experimental validation:We validate our
proposed methodology through extensive simulations
involving both synthetic and realistic wireless environments.
In particular, we consider dynamic fading scenarios
generated using the Sionna [38], COST2100 [39], and
QuaDRiGa [40] simulators. The experiments demonstrate
our ability to rapidly adapt to time-varying conditions while
achieving state-of-the-art performance in terms of uncoded
bit error rate ( BER) and robustness to channel variations.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
presents the system model, comprised of both the channel
model and receiver architecture. Section III describes our
modular online Bayesian learning approach, which we evaluate
in Section IV, while Section V provides concluding remarks.
D. Organization and Notation
Throughout this paper, we use boldface lower-case and
upper-case letters for vectors (e.g., x) and matrices (e.g., X),
respectively. The(i, j)th entry ofXis denoted by[X] i,j.
Calligraphic letters denote sets, e.g.,X, with|X |being the
cardinality of X . We use R and C for the sets of real and complex
numbers, respectively. The notationP(·)is the probability
function, while E[·] is the expectation operator. When a subscript
is specified, e.g., Eθ∼q[·], the expectation is taken with respect to
the random variable θ distributed according to q(θ). We use (·)⊤,
⊙, and diag(·) to denote the transpose operator, the element-wise
product of two vectors, and a diagonal matrix with the elements
of a vector on its diagonal, respectively. We use ℜ{·} and ℑ{·}
to denote the real and complex parts, respectively, of a scalar or
vector. The gradient operator ∇zf(z) denotes a column vector
of partial derivatives, i.e.,∇ zf= [ ∂f
∂z1
, . . . , ∂f
∂zP
]⊤.
II. SYSTEMMODEL ANDPRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the system model, describing
the time-varying channel model and transmission scheme in
Subsection II-A, and the modular receiver architecture in Subsec-
tion II-B. In Subsection II-C, we formulate the online adaptation
problem, and review key preliminaries in Subsection II-D. The
main symbols defined in the following are summarized in Table I.
A. Time-Varying Channel Model
1) Channel Model:We consider an uplink MIMO system
with K single-antenna users communicating with an N-antenna
receiver. Each symbol s(k)
t ∈ S transmitted from user k at time
tis drawn from a constellation of size|S|= 2 B, where each
symbol modulatesBbits. In particular, let
b(k)
t =
h
b(k)
t,1 , . . . , b(k)
t,B
i⊤
∈ {0,1} B, k= 1, . . . , K,(1)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
3
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF SYMBOLS
SymbolDescription
tTime index
KNumber of receiver users
NNumber of receiver antennas
S ⊂CSymbol constellation
B= log 2 |S|Number of bits per symbol
bt ∈ {0,1} KB Bit vector
st ∈ S K Transmitted symbol vector
rt ∈C N Received signal
ℓt ∈[0,1] KB Soft bit-level estimates
xt ∈R 2N+KB DeepSIC module input
PNumber of receiver parameters
θt ∈R P Parameters of the deep receiver
denote the binary vector, which is mapped to the symbol s(k)
t .
The bit vector transmitted by all K users at time t is denoted
bt =

b(1)
t
⊤
,

b(2)
t
⊤
, . . . ,

b(K)
t
⊤⊤
∈ {0,1} KB ,(2)
and the corresponding complete symbol vector is defined as
st =
h
s(1)
t , . . . , s(K)
t
i
∈ S K.(3)
The received signal, rt ∈C N , is characterized by a generic
time-varying conditional distribution,
P(r t =r|s t =s),(4)
representing dynamic channel conditions. Beyond this general
input-output relationship, we do not impose a specific channel
model, allowing for complex and highly nonlinear channels.
In the following,P(·)denotes the true distribution governing
the data as in (4), whilep(·)denotes an induced or assumed
probability measure.
2) Temporal Variations:A common approach in the MIMO
literature adopts a block-fading assumption, where the channel
is treated as approximately constant over a coherence interval
and assumed to change independently between successive
blocks [41]. While this model simplifies receiver design, it does
not fully capture the nature of real-world wireless channels,
which often exhibit continuous variations over time, leading
to effects such as channel aging within an assumed coherence
block [42]. In this work, we allow the channel to change within
each block. It is only assumed that the conditional probability
from (4) evolves smoothly over time.
3) Transmission Scheme:We consider a generic pilot-based
transmission scheme as illustrated in Fig. 2. Here, transmission
consists of two phases:
1. Asynchronization phaseduring which Tsync predetermined
symbols{s t}t=1,...,Tsync
are transmitted. Such sequences,
commonly employed by wireless protocols for transmission
alignment, are used here for the initial calibration of our
deep receiver.
2. Atracking phase, where data blocks are transmitted with
pilot symbols periodically inserted between them. The
receiver decodes the data symbols in real time, and uses
the pilot symbols to fine-tune its operation, e.g., to adapt
the deep receiver through online learning.
Pilots
Data
Data
Data
Pilot
Pilot
Pilot
Fig. 2. Transmission scheme with synchronization and periodic pilot-data blocks.
B. Receiver Architecture
The demodulator is implemented as a DNN parameterized by
a vector of weights θt, which can be adapted over time to track
changing channel conditions. At each time stept, the DNN
maps the received signalr t ∈C N to soft bit level estimates,
denoted by
ℓt =h θt (rt)∈[0,1] KB .(5)
The output vector is structured as
ℓt =
h
ℓ(1)
t,1 , . . . , ℓ(1)
t,B, . . . , ℓ(K)
t,1 , . . . , ℓ(K)
t,B
i⊤
,(6)
where ℓ(k)
t,i is the soft estimate of the i-th bit of user k at time t.
It can be interpreted as the estimated conditional probability
that b(k)
t,i = 1 conditioned on the received signal and the DNN
parameters, i.e.,
ℓ(k)
t,i =p(b (k)
t,i = 1|r t,θ t).(7)
For uncoded transmission, hard decisions on transmitted bits
are made by thresholding the soft estimates, i.e.,
ˆbt =1[ℓ t >0.5]∈ {0,1} KB ,(8)
where the comparison and the indicator function 1[·] are applied
element-wise.
C. Problem Formulation
Our goal is to develop an online learning algorithm for
enabling adaptive and flexible deep receivers by optimizing
the DNN parameters based on the incoming pilot symbols.
Formally, after receiving the channel output rt corresponding
to a pilot symbols t, the algorithm maps them to an updated
parameter vectorθ t. The receiver is then used to detect the
subsequent data symbols. The objective is to minimize the BER
in the data-bearing portion of the transmission.
Let Tdata denote the set of time indices corresponding to the
data symbols. The optimization problem can be expressed as:
min
{θt}
1
BK|T data|
X
t∈Tdata
KX
k=1
BX
i=1
P

ˆb(k)
t,i ̸=b (k)
t,i
 rt,θ t

,(9)
where the decoded bits ˆbt depend onθ t through the neural
network mapping in (5) and (8).
This optimization of the DNN is to be carried out sequentially
in anonlinemanner, updatingθ t using only the information
available up to time t. The online learning algorithm must be
capable of tracking a smoothly time-varying, potentially nonlinear
channel, while adhering to the practical constraints of wireless
communication systems, namely, non-stationary signal statistics,
and low-latency requirements. The key challenges include:
=== PAGE BREAK ===
4
C1 Non-stationarity:The channel distribution evolves rapidly
over time, requiring continuous adaptation of the receiver.
C2Latency and complexity:Receiver updates must be
computationally efficient and meet strict runtime budgets
for real-time operation.
C3Nonlinearity:The channel (4) at each timetmay be
highly nonlinear, difficult to parametrize explicitly, and
possibly include non-Gaussian stochasticity. This makes
classical model-based adaptation impractical.
D. Preliminaries
1) Bayesian Deep Learning:Bayesian deep learning offers
a framework to quantify uncertainty in DNN predictions by
treating the DNN parameters θ as random variables with prior
p(θ) and learning their posterior distribution p(θ|D) given the
data D [33], [43]. The posterior can be represented explicitly,
as in variational inference [44], or implicitly via alternative
induced trainable stochasticity, as in Monte Carlo dropout [45].
Specifically, in standard (offline) variational inference, the
posteriorp(θ|D)is explicitly approximated by avariational
distribution qψ(θ), parametrized by thevariational parameters
ψ. These parameters are learned by the minimization of
the evidence lower bound (ELBO) objective, which consists
of the expected negative log-likelihood regularized by a
Kullback–Leibler divergence ( KLD) term between the induced
qψ(θ)and the priorp(θ). For a labeled dataset of the form
D={(x i,y i)}|D|
i=1, this loss is given by
LELBO
D (ψ;p(θ)) =− 1
|D|
|D|X
i=1
Eθ∼qψ [logp(y i|xi,θ)]
+D KL (qψ(θ)||p(θ)),(10)
where DKL denotes the KLD. The ELBO enables gradient-based
learning using, e.g., Bayes-by-backprop (BBB) [46].
During inference,Jrealizations{θ j}J
j=1 are drawn in an
i.i.d. manner from the distributionq ψ to obtain an ensemble
{p(y|x,θ j)}J
j=1 whose predictive distributions are averaged
to obtain a final prediction. Compared to standard (frequentist)
DNNs, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) were shown to be
less prone to overfitting, and their output probabilistic estimates
are typically more calibrated, i.e., more faithful to the actual
prediction uncertainty [47].
2) Modular Deep Receivers:Modular deep receivers are
deep learning-based architectures that incorporate task-specific
structure by associating sub-networks with identifiable sub-tasks
in the receiver processing chain. This design enables the use
of compact DNN modules with interpretable output features,
localized parameter updates, and improved scalability [10]. In
particular, such architectures naturally arise from model-based
deep learning methods [48], where the algorithmic steps of
classical receivers are integrated into the network structure via
unfolding or architectural priors.
Our main example used in this paper of a modular deep
receiver isDeepSIC[23], which unfolds the iterations of
the soft interference cancellation (SIC) algorithm of [49] for
uplink MIMO detection into a modular DNN architecture. As
illustrated in Fig. 3, DeepSIC consists ofQiterations, each
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Fig. 3. DeepSIC model architecture illustration.
withKseparate modules. Thekth module at iterationqis
responsible for decoding the symbol of user k while canceling
the interference from the remaining users. The parameter vector
of the receiver at timet, denotedθ t, can be decomposed as
θt =

θ(k,q)
t
	K,Q
k,q=1,1, where θ(k,q)
t denotes the weights of the
kth user’s module at theqth SIC iteration.
Specifically, the kth module at iteration q produces a vector of
soft estimates, denoted by ℓ(k,q)
t , by applying the user-specific
DNN mapping hθ(k,q)
t
to an input vector shared by all modules
in the layer, which is comprised of the received signals and
the previous iteration’s output as
x(q)
t =

ℜ

r⊤
t
	
,ℑ

r⊤
t
	
,

ℓ(q−1)
t
⊤⊤
,(11)
where
ℓ(q)
t =

ℓ(1,q)
t
⊤
, . . . ,

ℓ(K,q)
t
⊤⊤
.(12)
Consequently, the soft estimates are updated as
ℓ(k,q)
t =h θ(k,q)
t

x(q)
t

.(13)
The initial soft estimates are set to ℓ(k,0)
t = [0.5, . . . ,0.5]⊤ for
allk= 1, . . . , K. The final soft estimatesℓ t are taken from
ℓ(k,Q)
t
	K
k=1.
The resulting deep unfolded version of SIC enables accurate
multi-user detection in complex nonlinear channels with
non-Gaussian noise [23], thus handling Challenge C3. Moreover,
the modular nature of DeepSIC was shown in [36] to be
beneficial when combined with BNNs for its internal modules,
as the improved calibration of Bayesian deep learning leads to
more accurate soft estimates exchanged by the modules, which
in turn leads to improved performance.
However, coping with nonstationarity (Challenge C1) requires
the receiver to adapt its parametersθ t (or their distribution
parametersψ t for BNNs). To-date, online learning is still a
complex and lengthy procedure (thus violating Challenge C2), as
regardless of whether the architecture is modular or black-box and
whether one employs BNNs or frequentist DNNs, training is still
carried out using numerous sequential gradient updates based on
SGD or its variants. Still, in our current context of online learning,
modular architectures, such as DeepSIC, offer several advantages:
(i) updates can be localized to specific modules corresponding
=== PAGE BREAK ===
5
to users with significant channel variation;(ii)inference and
training can be parallelized across modules; and(iii)the
architecture naturally supports a pipelined processing strategy. In
our proposed methodology, we exploit these properties, combined
with BNNs, to enable efficient and scalable online Bayesian
learning via module-wise updates, as detailed in Section III.
III. MODULARONLINEBAYESIANLEARNING
This section introduces our proposed methodology for rapid
adaptation based on modular online Bayesian learning. The
goal is to track time-varying channels (Challenge C1) using
deep receivers capable of handling complex nonlinearities
(Challenge C3), while meeting stringent latency and complexity
constraints (Challenge C2). In Subsection III-A we cast online
training of BNNs as atrackingproblem in a parameter-space
dynamical system, where the received pilots serve as streaming
measurements. In Subsection III-B we leverage this state-space
representation to perform online learning via efficient recursive
Bayesian filtering. This Bayesian framework, which integrates
a level of uncertainty in the current model, enables replacing
multiple gradient-descent iterations with asingle stepparameter
update. Then, in Subsection III-C we combine Bayesian tracking
with modular receiver architectures, and show how modularity
facilitates low-complexity, low-latency online adaptation. We
conclude by providing a discussion in Subsection III-D.
A. State Space Formulation
Our approach is based on modeling the online learning of deep
receivers as adynamic system. To formulate this, we consider
a generic DNN-based receiver, which at time t is tasked with
mapping its input xt into bit-wise soft estimates, ℓt =h ˆθt
(xt)∈
(0,1) B, aiming to recover the true bits (labels) denotedb t ∈
{0,1} B. A special case of this generic model is a single DeepSIC
module that can be obtained by omitting the superscriptk, q.
We model channel variations in the DNN parameter space
via therandom process,{ ˆθt}t=1,2,..., where ˆθt denotes the
desired DNN parameters at timet. Considering relatively
smooth variations in the desired DNN parameters, we assume
a first-order Gaussian Markov model of the form
p(ˆθt|ˆθt−1 =θ) =N(γθ, σ 2I),(14)
where parameterσ 2 >0controls the evolution rate, while
parameterγ∈(0,1]determines the memory of the process.
Values near 1 retain more past information, while smaller values
enable faster adaptation to rapid changes. The initial weights
are assumed to obey a Gaussian priorp
 ˆθ0

=N(µ 0,Σ 0).
At time t, the output of the DNN receiver with the desired
parameters ˆθt, given by ℓt =h ˆθt
(xt), dictates the distribution
of the vector of independent Bernoulli variables, such that
p(bt,i = 1|x t, ˆθt) =ℓ t,i.(15)
Consequently, the mean and covariance of the bit vectorb t
conditioned on the desired DNN parameters ˆθt are given by
E

bt|xt, ˆθt

=h ˆθt
(xt),(16)
Cov

bt|xt, ˆθt

=diag
 
hˆθt
(xt)⊙(1−h ˆθt
(xt))

.(17)
Equations (14)-(15) define anonlinear state space model ( SSM)
withGaussian state evolution, where the latent states are the
desired DNN parameters ˆθt ∈R P .
B. Bayesian Online Learning
We model online learning as the sequential estimation of
desired DNN parameters ˆθt evolving as a Markov process (14)
and generating noisy observations (15) of the information bits.
Consequently, the online learning task is to process data points
(pilots) that arrive sequentially and continuously update the
belief about ˆθt as new pilot data (xt,b t) arrives. To leverage
this SSM for learning purposes, we adopt aBayesian deep
learningperspective, and model the receiver as a BNN whose
parameters obey a Gaussian distribution (or a subfamily of
Gaussian such as diagonal Gaussian). The variational distribution
at timet, denoted byq ψt(θt), is parameterized by a mean
vectorµ t and a covariance matrixΣ t, i.e.,
qψt(ˆθt) =N(µ t,Σ t),(18)
which serves as a tractable approximation for the true posterior
p(ˆθt | {(x τ ,b τ)}t
τ=1).
Casting the learning dynamics as a SSM and the learning
task as updating a Gaussian belief gives rise to two online
learning algorithms: (i) an algorithm based on a variant of the
extended Kalman filter ( EKF) [50], and (ii) an algorithm based
on combining Bayesian learning and natural gradient updates [19].
Both approaches operate in aone-shotmanner, allowing one to
update with asingle gradient stepon a single data point.
1) Conditional-Moments EKF:The SSM representation
in (14)–(15) suggests that online learning can be treated as
the tracking of a latent state vector ˆθt. Together with the
imposed Gaussianity (18), this naturally motivates the use of
Kalman-type algorithms to recursively update the posterior. Our
primary learning method thus employs the conditional-moments
EKF (CM-EKF) algorithm [50], which extends the EKF
algorithm to non-Gaussian SSMs. The CM-EKF follows the
standardpredict–updatestructure of the EKF.
In the predict step, an approximate prior at time t is obtained
by propagating the previous posterior from time t−1 through
the Gaussian state evolution model in (14). Given the previous
posterior qψt−1(ˆθt−1), the predictive prior at time t is given by:
qψt|t−1(ˆθt) =
Z
p(ˆθt | ˆθt−1)q ψt−1(ˆθt−1)d ˆθt−1.(19)
According to (18), we assume that we have a Gaussian
posterior,q ψt−1(ˆθt−1) =N(µ t−1,Σ t−1). Thus, the integral
in (19) yields another Gaussian distribution [51] with mean
and covariance, respectively, obtained as
µt|t−1 =γµ t−1,(20)
Σt|t−1 =γ 2Σt−1 +σ 2I.(21)
In the update step, the predictive distribution is then used
as a prior. Since the likelihood in (15) is a function of the
network mapping, which is highly nonlinear, we employ a local
linearization of the DNN mapping that transforms (16) into
=== PAGE BREAK ===
6
an affine transformation of the state ˆθt by taking its first-order
Taylor series approximation around (20). Namely, we have
¯hˆθt
(xt) =h µt|t−1 (xt) +H t

ˆθt −µ t|t−1

,(22)
where
H t =∇ ⊤
ˆθ hˆθ(xt)
ˆθ=µt|t−1
∈R KB×P
is the Jacobian of the network with respect to its weights.
The variational posterior at timetis obtained by the
CM-EKF update rule, which for our setting of online learning
maps the DNN inputx t and the corresponding pilot bitsb t
into the BNN parametersψ t via
µt =µ t|t−1 +K t

bt −h µt|t−1 (xt)

,(23)
Σt =Σ t|t−1 −K tH tΣt|t−1.(24)
HereK t is the Kalman gain matrix that is given by
Kt =Σ t|t−1H ⊤
t

H tΣt|t−1H ⊤
t +R t
−1
,(25)
where
Rt ≜Cov
h
bt
xt, ˆθt =µ t|t−1
i
(26)
is computed according to (17) by setting ˆθt =µ t|t−1. To
ensure numerical stability, the diagonal entries of Rt are clipped
from below at a minimum value, which we set to0.1in our
numerical study.
Online learning via the CM-EKF updates the BNN distribution
parameters(µ t,Σ t)in a single step. That is, each new
observation xt is processed once by the network (to compute
hµt|t−1 (xt)), and only a single backward pass is required (to
compute H t). This stands in contrast to standard SGD-based
learning, which typically requires numerous gradient steps. More-
over, CM-EKF does not require sampling from the variational
distribution, making it a robust deterministic learning rule.
While the complexity of each SGD iteration only scales
linearly with the number of DNN parameters P , the complexity
of processing one observation vector with the CM-EKF is
O
 
BP 2 +B 3
where BP 2 is typically the dominant term, as
P≫B , i.e., the number of DNN weights notably exceeds the
number of bits extracted fromx t.
2) Bayesian Online Natural Gradient: CM-EKF is essentially
an algorithm for the tracking of a dynamic system, where the
aim is to have the posterior mean estimate the latent state in
the mean squared error ( MSE) sense [21]. As the goal in online
learning is not necessarily to minimize the MSE with respect
to the assumed desired parameters, but rather to minimize
some learning loss function, as in e.g., the ELBO (10), one
can formulate more conventional online learning algorithms
that are derived from such loss formulations.
Recent advances in Bayesian learning from streaming data
have developed methods that enable single-step online learning
based on the ELBO. In particular, the Bayesian online natural
gradient (BONG) algorithm proposed in [19] updates ψt based
on the ELBO for the current sample (xt,b t) by taking a single
natural gradient step while using µt|t−1 as a starting point and
qψt|t−1 as a prior (so that the KL term vanishes when evaluated
at ψ=ψ t|t−1). The resulting online learning rule is given by
ψt =ψ t|t−1+F −1
ψt|t−1
∇ψt|t−1Eθ∼qψt|t−1
[logp(b t|xt,θ)],(27)
where the Fisher information matrix ( FIM) associated with the
variational parametersψ t|t−1, is defined as
F ψt|t−1 =
Eθ∼qψt|t−1
h
∇ψt|t−1logq ψt|t−1(θ)∇⊤
ψt|t−1
logq ψt|t−1(θ)
i
.(28)
When employing a Gaussian variational distribution
where the BNN parameters are the natural parameters
ψt = (Σ −1
t µt,− 1
2Σ−1
t ), then (27) reduces to two update
equations [19], given by
µt =µ t|t−1+ΣtEθt∼ψt|t−1[∇θt logp(b t |h θt (xt))],(29)
Σ−1
t =Σ −1
t|t−1−E θt∼ψt|t−1

∇2
θt logp(b t |h θt (xt))

.(30)
The BONG update rule (29)-(30) requires computing
stochastic expectations. To translate it into an online learning
method, we consider three different forms of approximations:
A1 Linearized Gaussianapproximations compute the expecta-
tions by adopting the linearized form (22) and imposing a
Gaussian distribution on the likelihood, i.e.,
p(bt|xt, ˆθt)≈ N
 ¯hˆθt
(xt),R t

,(31)
whereR t is defined in (26).
A2 Empirical Fisher ( EF)replaces the Hessian in (30) with
the outer-product of the sampled gradients [52].
A3 Diagonal plus low-rank ( DLR)parameterization restricts
the covariance in (29) to be of the form [53]
Σ−1
t =D t +W tW ⊤
t ,(32)
whereD t is a diagonal matrix andW t ∈R P×R with
R≪P.
Among the above options, EF approximations (A2) are
typically less accurate and often lead to instability. When using a
linearized Gaussian formulation (A1), the stochastic expectations
exhibit a closed-form expression of the model parameters and
the linearized modelH t. In fact, under this modeling, the
BONG update in (29)-(30) coincides with the CM-EKF update
equations (23)-(24) [19]. While the DLR parameterization (A3)
does not allow computing the expectations on its own, it can
be combined with A1 to avoid the quadratic complexity growth
of the CM-EKF with the number of parameters P . Specifically,
the BONG update under A1+A3 is termedvariational-diagonal
extended Kalman filter ( VD-EKF)[18] when setting R= 0 in
(32), orLo-Fi[54] for R >0 , and in both cases the resulting
complexity only grows linearly withP.
In summary, the BONG algorithm allows one-step online
learning based on the ELBO objective. Although this step can
be computationally heavy due to the need to evaluate stochastic
expectations, it can be approximated with reduced complexity.
The most stable and expressive approximation coincides with
CM-EKF, the fastest coincides with VD-EKF, while Lo-Fi
balances complexity and performance, as also shown in our
numerical study in Section IV.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
7
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Sigmoid
Fig. 4. Pipelined DeepSIC model architecture illustration.
C. Modular Bayesian Online Adaptation
The complexity associated with full covariance adaptation
methods such as CM-EKF grows at least quadratically with the
number of DNN weights P , notably limiting their usefulness for
rapid adaptation of large DNNs. We next demonstrate how both
complexity and latency can be alleviated by exploiting modular
architectures such as DeepSIC. In the following, we build upon
the state space formulation (Subsection III-A) and recursive
online Bayesian learning algorithms (Subsection III-B), to
show how modular architectures (focusing on DeepSIC) enable
rapid online adaptation via module-wise updates, parallelization
across user modules, and low-latency pipelining, harnessing
the treatment of channel outputs as streaming data.
Module-Wise Updates:Each DeepSIC module, indexed
by(k, q), maintains its own Gaussian posteriorq (k,q)
ψt
=
N(µ (k,q)
t ,Σ (k,q)
t ). Since each module is tasked with producing
a soft estimate of the kth user bits b(k)
t , we can assign a label
for each module, and thus formulate aseparate module-wise
SSM. Accordingly, each module can be evaluated and trained
separately via one-shot Bayesian online learning based on its
corresponding SSM.
While BNNs typically come at the cost of slow inference
due to the need to sample multiple i.i.d. realizations of
θ(k,q)
t ∼q (k,q)
ψt
, here we employ the Bayesian modeling only
for learning purposes. During inference, we plug in the mean
parameter of the variational distribution, i.e., set θ(k,q)
t =µ (k,q)
t ,
to avoid the overhead and excessive latency of sampling.
Parallelization:The ability to disentangle the update of each
module can notably facilitate online learning, particularly when
combined with some form of parallel processing capabilities.
Specifically, all K modules in iteration q share the same input
x(q)
t and can compute their update rules in parallel. In practice,
this leverages either multicore or vectorization hardware to
achieve up toK-fold speed-up over sequential processing.
Pipelining:Since DeepSIC iterates q= 1,2, . . . , Q sequen-
tially, a conventional implementation would process each sample
through all Q iterations before processing the next. In our case,
we view the channel outputs as streaming data, where both
inference and online training are done on each sample rather
than on aggregated batches. This approach allows us to pipeline
Q samples through the Q iterations, so that at each time step,
iteration q processes sample t−(q−1) for online adaptation or
inference, as illustrated in Fig. 4. This reduces overhead by up
to a Q-fold, introducing minimal latency: at time t, the network
outputs soft estimates of bits at t−Q+ 1 . Such latency is often
acceptable, particularly since digital communications typically
employ subsequent channel coding, where a sequence of soft
estimates are gathered at the output of the demodulator before
the decoded bits are extracted, and thus there is some tolerable
latency before data is decoded and processed.
Algorithm Summary:Upon receiving pilot(r t,b t), each
module applies predict and update steps using (´x(q)
t ,b (k)
t−(q−1)),
where
´x(q)
t =

ℜ
n
r⊤
t−(q−1)
o
,ℑ
n
r⊤
t−(q−1)
o
,

ℓ(q−1)
t−1
⊤⊤
.(33)
The update step can be based on the CM-EKF, or on
other reduced complexity variants of BONG that employ DLR
approximations. We summarize the online training process in
Algorithm 1, which fuses module-wise parallel filtering with
pipelined execution.
Algorithm 1Modular online Bayesian training at timet
Require:Pilot queue{(r t−i,b t−i)}Q−1
i=0
Require:Variational parameters

ψ(k,q)
t−1
	K,Q
k,q=1,1
Require:Predictions from previous step{ℓ (q)⊤
t−1 }Q−1
q=1
1:ℓ (0)
t−1 ←[0.5, . . . ,0.5] ⊤
2:forq= 1, . . . , Qdo
3:τ←t−(q−1)
4: ´x(q)
t ←

ℜ

r⊤
τ
	
,ℑ

r⊤
τ
	
,

ℓ(q−1)
t−1
⊤⊤
5:for allk= 1, . . . , Kdo
6:Predict:ψ (k,q)
t|t−1 ←predict(ψ (k,q)
t−1 )
7:Update:ψ (k,q)
t ←update(ψ (k,q)
t|t−1, ´x(q)
t ,b (k)
τ )
8:Inference:ℓ (k,q)
t ←h µ(k,q)
t
(´xq
t )
9:end for
10:ℓ (q)⊤
t ←
 
ℓ(1,q)
t
⊤
, . . . ,
 
ℓ(K,q)
t
⊤⊤
11:end for
Ensure:Updated variational parameters

ψ(k,q)
t
	K,Q
k,q=1,1
In terms of overhead, it is noted that each module-wise
operation, i.e., thePredict-Update-Inferencesteps in Algorithm 1,
requires two forward passes of ´x(q)
t through the module, and
one backward pass for gradient computation. Assuming the
more-computationally complex CM-EKF is employed, the
complexity order of these steps is of orderO(KBP 2)each.
However, as opposed to the usage of such methods for training
an end-to-end DNN as detailed in Subsection III-B, hereP
represents the parameters of a compact module, which can be
relatively small (e.g.,P <1000in our numerical study), as
opposed to the overall DNN. For comparison, training DeepSIC
withQiterations andKusers via end-to-end CM-EKF
would result in complexity order ofO(BQ 2K 3P 2), while
module-wise learning 1 requires order ofO(BQKP 2).
1Here, the per-module observation dimension is B, so that the local Jacobian
and noise covariance satisfyH t ∈R B×P andR t ∈R B×B , wherePis
the number of trainable parameters in the corresponding module.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
8
Moreover, it is emphasized that our pipelining of the modular
architectures results in thePredict-Update-Inferencesteps in
Algorithm 1 being independent with each other, and can thus
be computed in parallel. Accordingly, given simple parallel
computation capabilities, the overhead in applying Algorithm 1
using CM-EKF can be made to be of an order ofO(BP 2),
where P here is the number of module parameters (i.e., ×QK
reduction due to parallelization). When also combining DLR
approximations, its complexity reduces even further to a linear
order ofO(BP).
D. Discussion
The proposed modular online Bayesian learning framework ad-
dresses the three main challenges introduced in Subsection II-C,
namely, non-stationarity, latency/complexity, and nonlinearity
(Challenges C1–C3). By introducing modeling assumptions in
a gradual and principled manner, our design enables efficient
and rapid single-step online learning. Specifically, the modular
architecture decomposes the detection task into compact and
interpretable sub-networks, reducing the scale of adaptation. The
Bayesian SSM in parameter space captures smooth temporal
dynamics of the receiver weights, naturally accommodating non-
stationarity, and supports treating received pilots as streaming
data. Posterior modeling with recursive Bayesian filtering allows
each update to be carried out with minimal overhead, offer-
ing computationally tractable real-time adaptation in dynamic
environments. Accordingly, the Gaussian evolution model in
parameter space and the use of local linearizations are modeling
choices adopted to enable tractable and low-latency Bayesian
filtering. While the reliability of these assumptions depends on
the nature of channel variations, and may be less faithful in
abrupt environmental changes, such as sudden signal blockages
or handovers, it is numerically shown in Section IV that the
resulting methodology still leads to rapid and efficient online
adaptation.
Modeling the receiver as a Bayesian neural network allows us
to associate a distribution with the network parameters, whose
covariance naturally quantifies the uncertainty in the current
parameter estimate. Quantifying parameter space uncertainty
enables the principled combination of new pilot observations
with the previously learned model through recursive Bayesian
filtering [46].Parameter uncertaintycan be converted intopre-
dictive uncertaintyat the output of the receiver via ensembling of
models sampled from the parameter space distribution [33] or via
distribution methods [47]. Therefore, the parameter uncertainty
maintained by the Bayesian update rules serves exclusively as a
modeling device that enables efficient online learning, supporting
Bayesian filtering in dynamic communication environments.
At the core of our methodology lies the departure from
conventional SGD-based training, which dominates deep
learning but requires multiple iterations. By casting online
learning as a tracking problem, we enable the use of recursive
Bayesian filters as training algorithms. While nonlinear Kalman
filtering methods have been considered for adapting small
neural networks over 25 years ago [55], their usage for learning
was largely abandoned as modern machine learning shifted
towards extremely large-scale models, where adaptation was
only feasible through stochastic gradient based optimization.
Recent attempts to reintroduce restricted Kalman-style learning
into deep models, e.g., [56], have primarily targeted offline
settings. In contrast, our approach fuses Bayesian filtering with
modular architectures, where each module can be individually
evaluated and updated, thereby making single-step Bayesian
learning not only possible but also computationally efficient.
Our framework gives rise to several extensions for future
research. One direction is to explore additional Bayesian online
learning formulations that explicitly assess uncertainty through
more advanced metrics, such as coverage-based measures [57],
which could provide further insight into the reliability of learned
parameter distributions in dynamic environments. A related
direction is the investigation of ensemble-based Bayesian tracking
methods, such as the ensemble Kalman filter and its stochastic
variants [57], [58]. While these approaches can provide improved
posterior approximations and enhanced uncertainty quantification,
their direct application to deep receivers is challenged by the
need to maintain and process multiple model instances, leading
to increased latency and computational overhead. Developing
lightweight ensemble or hybrid filtering schemes that retain
the benefits of sampling-based uncertainty representations while
meeting the stringent real-time constraints of communication
systems is therefore an interesting avenue for future work.
Another promising direction is the reduction of the dimensionality
of the tracked parameter space by learning lower-dimensional
latent representations of the receiver parameters, thereby enabling
Bayesian tracking in a compact latent space [20]. Finally,
one may consider alternative Bayesian tracking formulations
that relax the Gaussian assumptions adopted in this work and
allow for non-Gaussian parameter dynamics and unknown
SSM parameters, drawing inspiration from recent advances in
Bayesian inference for stochastic dynamic systems [59], [60].
IV. EXPERIMENTALSTUDY
This section numerically evaluates the online learning
methodologies2 proposed in Section III. Based on the common
experimental setup detailed in Subsection IV-A, we evaluate four
aspects of our methodology: (i) Before assessing communication
performance, we commence in Subsection IV-B with comparing
the average online learning time of the different algorithms,
to understand the real-time feasibility of each method;(ii)
In Subsection IV-C we use a synthetic single user channel
with a constant achievable rate to demonstrate the ability of
single-step Bayesian adaptation to rapidly learn a near-optimal
parameterization for a neural receiver, without any domain
knowledge, and steadily track as the channel distribution changes
in time; (iii) In Subsection IV-D we showcase the advantages
of modular architectures for online training on multi-user linear
MIMO channels; (iv) Finally, in Subsection IV-E we compare
the performance of different algorithms that learn from streaming
data, on both linear and nonlinear multi-user MIMO scenarios.
A. Setup
1) Receiver Architectures:We utilize three different deep
receivers. Our main DNN-aided modular receiver architecture is
2Our code and all hyper-parameters used in this study can be found online
at https://github.com/gusakovy/adaptive-deep-receivers.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
9
based on DeepSIC [23], with each module comprised of a com-
pact two-layer multi-layer perceptron ( MLP). For a non-modular
DNN-based receiver we employ a ResNet-type architecture
following [13]. For the single user setting (Subsection IV-C),
we use a fully-connected network with two layers.
2) Learning Algorithms:Since the main objective of this work
is to study rapid online learning for deep receivers, the numerical
comparisons focus on different training algorithms applied to the
same receiver architecture, focusing on the impact of the learning
methodology itself. Accordingly, we train the aforementioned
architectures using the following online learning algorithms:
•SGD-I-J- appliesIepochs of mini-batch SGD with a
batch size of J on the cross entropy loss of a frequentist
(non-Bayesian) model.
• GD-I - applies I iterations of gradient descent ( GD) (one
sample at a time) [61], starting from the previousθ t−1,
using a frequentist model based on the cross-entropy loss.
• BBB-I Bayes-by-backprop [46] adapted to online learning.
For every sample, the update step applies IGD iterations
on the online ELBO loss,
Lt(ψt) =−E θt∼qψt
[logp(b t |r t,θ t)]
+D KL

qψt(θt)∥q ψt|t−1(θt)

,(34)
i.e., for each iterationi= 1, . . . , I, set
ψ(i)
t =ψ (i−1)
t −α t∇ψt Lt

ψ(i−1)
t

,(35)
where αt is the learning rate. The iterations are initialized
withψ (0)
t =ψ t|t−1, and the expectation in (34) is
approximated by linearization, which we found to be
consistently more efficient and faster than the commonly
used sample mean.
• VD-EKF/Lo-Fi/CM-EKF- BONG implementation based
on linearized Gaussian approximation (A1). This leads to
different EKF variants, depending on whether DLR (A3) is
assumed: VD-EKF (R= 0 ) [18]; Lo-Fi (0< R≪P ) [54];
and CM-EKF (R=P) [50].
•BONG-EF- The BONG algorithm detailed in Subsec-
tion III-B using the EF approach (A2).
Among the compared algorithms, only SGD does not use
streaming data, meaning that it processes in batches and is
allowed to look back at past samples to perform multiple
epochs, while the other algorithms process one sample at a time.
It is also noted that the compared learning algorithms include
methods that train frequentist DNN parameters (SGD and GD)
as well as ones that train the distribution parameters of BNNs.
However, for fair comparison, once learning is concluded,
performance is compared for all approaches using frequentist
inference, which for the BNNs implies using the mean of the
variational parameters as a plug-in approximation for inference.
Unless stated otherwise, for all considered experimental sce-
narios, the state-space hyperparameters are set to γ= 0.999 and
σ2 = 10−3. These values, which are shared across all evaluations,
were based on experimental results from [19], and further verified
through empirical trials. In practice,σ 2 should be chosen to
reflect the underlying channel dynamics, while the chosen value
forγwas found to be consistently appropriate, as it mainly
ensures the variance of the stochastic process does not diverge.
B. Online Learning Latency
The main goal of our single-step online learning methodology
is to enable adapting deep receivers to channel variations with
an extremely minor overhead. We next show how each of the
ingredients incorporated in our framework (single-step Bayesian
learning, approximations A2-A3, modular adaptation) translates
into latency reduction. We consider a MIMO setting with
K= 3 users and N= 5 antennas, using a modular (DeepSIC)
and a non-modular (ResNet) deep receivers. As our focus is
on latency, we compare the learning algorithms that operate
in a streaming manner (adapt on each incoming sample), under
different forms of DLR limitations R (as A3 can be combined
with any Bayesian adaptation method). All models were trained
using JAX on the same platform, an Intel i7 12th Gen CPU,
i.e., on a standard laptop without dedicated AI accelerators. The
resulting average latencies are reported in Table II.
Among the EKF-based methods (A1), VD-EKF, which
enforces a diagonal covariance, achieves the lowest latency. Lo-Fi,
which uses a diagonal + rank- R covariance structure, introduces
a moderate overhead compared to VD-EKF but remains in
the same latency regime as GD-10while being considerably
more expressive. The full covariance variant CM-EKF incurs
a considerable increase in latency. The EF approximation (A2)
reduces the latencies of the BONG algorithm for all covariance
types, at the cost of stability and performance reduction, as
shown in the following subsections.
The effect of modularity is also evident: DeepSIC consistently
achieves sub-millisecond adaptation, whereas the same update
rules applied to a dense ResNet quickly become impractical. This
highlights that combining modular architectures with single-step
Bayesian adaptation is essential to meet real-time constraints.
Beyond execution time, an important measure is the memory
footprint of the proposed Bayesian adaptation. The primary
storage requirement for full-rank methods stems from the
covariance matrix associated with each module’s parameters,
which scales asO(P 2), (recall thatPdenotes the number
of trainable parameters per module). By utilizing a modular
architecture where each detection unit is a relatively small neural
network (e.g., with around P≈500 parameters), the memory
requirement is kept to approximately 1 MB per module. This
modularity is crucial for scalability: in a non-modular, monolithic
receiver architecture, the total number of parameters would be
significantly larger, forcing the O(P 2) storage of the covariance
matrix into the gigabyte range, resulting in out-of-memory errors
noted in Table II.
Latency/sample[mSec]Algorithm Σt DLR
rankR(A3) DeepSIC ResNet
GD-I
I= 10 N/A 0.268 0.528
Full:R=P OOM OOMBBB-I
I= 10 Diag:R= 0 0.644 14.12
Full:R=P(CM-EKF) 2.942 OOM
DLR:R= 10(Lo-Fi) 0.356 8.117BONG + A1
(EKF-type) Diag:R= 0(VD-EKF) 0.103 4.526
Full:R=P 1.712 OOM
DLR:R= 10 0.319 1.443BONG + A2
(EF) Diag:R= 0 0.083 1.230
TABLE II
AVERAGE TRAINING ITERATION TIME PER SAMPLE,K, N= (3,5);OUT OF
MEMORY(OOM)DENOTES METHODS THAT COULD NOT BE EXECUTED.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
10
0 100 200 300 400 500
Channel Snapshot
10 2
10 1
100
Symbol Error Rate
120 140 160 180
4 × 10 3
5 × 10 3
6 × 10 3
7 × 10 3
SGD-8-4
CM-EKF
NLMS
MAP
Fig. 5. Symbol error rates, linear rotation channel.
C. Linear Rotation Channel
Here, we consider a simple linear rotation channel with
a single user and QPSK symbols. The channel for timetis
modeled as a noisy rotation byφ t radians, i.e.,
rt =
cos(φt)−sin(φ t)
sin(φt) cos(φ t)

st +u t,(36)
where ut is Gaussian white noise with variance σ2
u = 1/16. The
rotation angle increases linearly with parameter α= 2.5·10 −4,
i.e.,φ t = 2παt.
The purpose of this setting is to evaluate our online learning
mechanism in a simple setup where model-based receiver
algorithms can be applied and approach optimality. Specifically,
for the channel in (36), the error rate of the optimal decoder
is constant, and can be derived using the maximuma-posteriori
(MAP) rule. While the MAP rule requires knowledge of the
instantaneous channel, it can be efficiently approached in this
setting using normalized least mean squares ( NLMS) channel
estimation followed by equalization and minimum distance
decoding. The neural receivers are feed-forward networks with
a single hidden layer of dimension 10 followed by a ReLU
activation function, and an output layer followed by an element-
wise Sigmoid operator that maps to soft bit-level estimates. We
compare here CM-EKF-based learning with standard SGD. For
both NLMS and SGD, we manually optimized the learning rates.
Fig. 5 illustrates the symbol error rates during 500 channel
snapshots, using16pilots per snapshot. The average error
rate of CM-EKF is lower than that of learning rate optimized
SGD performing8epochs with batch size4. Furthermore, it
converges faster than both SGD-8-4 and NLMS, taking only 6
snapshots to reach within 0.2% of the optimal symbol error rate,
compared to around12it takes NLMS and40it takes SGD.
Training using SGD is also less stable, with a significantly
higher peak error when tracking. Fig. 6 visualizes the decision
zones of each receiver after 500 blocks. The CM-EKF trained
decoder closely matches the MAP decision zones, underlining
the ability of the Bayesian receiver to generalize well, while
the SGD trained decoder noticeably distorts the decision zones,
overfitting to noisy observations.
D. Modular vs. Non-Modular Architectures
We proceed to demonstrate the usefulness of modular
architectures for enabling efficient online learning using our
Bayesian methodology. To that aim, we compare the modular
DeepSIC architecture with a black-box DNN based on a ResNet
architecture, known to be suitable for deep receivers [13].
The DNN is comprised of an input layer followed by ReLU
activation, 4 residual layers [62], and an output layer followed
by an elementwise Sigmoid operator. The input of this ResNet
is the received signalr t, and the output is a vector of soft
bit-level estimates for all users,ℓ t.
The data for this experiment is generated from the QuaDRiGa
MIMO geometry-based simulator [40], using the 3GPP
line-of-sight configuration, having K= 3 single-antenna users
in motion transmit to a N= 5 antenna receiver. We take 100
consecutive channel snapshots at constant intervals, and64
symbols are transmitted for each snapshot. The first 4 snapshots
are used for synchronization, i.e., Tsync = 256, and for the rest
transmit 16 pilots per snapshot with the intention of providing
sufficient training data. All results are averaged over 10 trials.
Fig. 7 illustrates the average BER vs. signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) for modular and non-modular architectures. Both ResNet
and DeepSIC were trained online using SGD- 8-4 on pilots from
each channel snapshot separately, and BBB-DIAG-10, VD-EKF,
Lo-Fi with rank R= 10 , and CM-EKF on streaming data. The
ResNet architecture could not be trained using CM-EKF due to
the size of the network ( P= 32,766 ). The results highlight the
benefits of modular architectures for online adaptation. For the
non-modular ResNet receiver, BBB fails to train the network
entirely, resulting in consistently poor performance across all
SNR values. Training with VD-EKF and SGD-8-4 allows the
ResNet to synchronize, but it still struggles to maintain low error
rates during the tracking period. Lo-Fi improves the performance
in the tracking phase, but it still remains lower than all methods
when applied to the modular DeepSIC receiver. In contrast, each
module of the modular DeepSIC architecture is a much smaller
network (P= 458 ) tasked with decoding a single user, which
makes synchronization easier and substantially improves online
adaptability. The EKF variants perform markedly better than
10 iterations of either SGD and BBB-DIAG. VD-EKF is the
least expressive of the EKF variants but has lower runtime than
BBB-DIAG-10. Lo-Fi has a runtime comparable to that of BBB-
DIAG-10 with improved error rate, and CM-EKF has the lowest
error rates across all SNR values, but is slower than BBB-10.
E. Streaming-Data Algorithms
Having demonstrated the usefulness of combining modular
architectures with online Bayesian learning, we proceed to
compare algorithms that learn online from streaming data with
DeepSIC. Specifically, we consider the Bayesian algorithms
BBB-DIAG-10, Lo-Fi with rankR= 10, CM-EKF and
BONG-EF, as well as the non-Bayesian GD-10 algorithm. All
results are averaged over 10 trials.
The data for this experiment is generated from three sources:
(i)A batch of static narrowband channels generated using
the Sionna [38] differentiable link level simulator using
the urban microcell ( UMi) channel model, having K= 4
=== PAGE BREAK ===
11
Fig. 6. Decision zones after 500 blocks (45 ◦ counter-clockwise rotation) for four decoders - optimal decoding using the MAP rule, channel estimation using
NLMS followed by maximum likelihood decoding, and two neural decoders trained using CM-EKF and SGD-8-4.
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SNR [dB]
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
Average Tracking BER
ResNet + SGD-8-4
ResNet + BBB-DIAG-10
ResNet + VD-EKF
ResNet + Lo-Fi
DeepSIC + SGD-8-4
DeepSIC + BBB-DIAG-10
DeepSIC + VD-EKF
DeepSIC + Lo-Fi
DeepSIC + CM-EKF
Fig. 7. Online learning for modular vs. non-modular architectures.
single antenna users, randomly scattered within a cell
sector, transmit to a singleN= 8antenna receiver. We
take 4 different channels and useT sync = 256pilots for
synchronization to each of them.
(ii)The COST2100 [39] geometry-based channel simulator,
using the dynamic ”indoor closely spaced users” config-
uration, having K= 3 users transmit to a N= 5 receiver
antenna. We take300consecutive channel snapshots at
constant intervals, each comprised of 64 symbols, with the
first 2 snapshots used for synchronization, i.e., Tsync = 128,
while the remaining snapshots include only 2 pilots each;
(iii) A nonlinear channel acquired by applying a nonlinear trans-
formation, and particularly a tanh to a linear channel gen-
erated from the QuaDRiGa simulator using a configuration
similar to the one used in Subsection IV-D. This operation
may represent distortions induced by the receiver acquisition
hardware. We take 100 channel snapshots of 64 symbols,
with the first 4 used for synchronization, i.e., Tsync = 256,
while the remaining snapshots include only16pilots.
For the Sionna channel synchronization experiment (Fig. 8),
we look at synchronization performance for 4 different channels
with 256 pilots transmitted for each of them. Since within every
window of 256 pilots the channel is constant, we report the BER
of the minimum mean square error ( MMSE) decoder with full
channel state information ( CSI) for reference. In addition, we
also use model-agnostic meta-learning ( MAML) [63] to learn
an initialization for quick adaptation to new channels. To do this,
we generate additional channels from the same model, and use
meta learning to train an initial parameterization for the DeepSIC
receiver, which minimizes the BER during synchronization
with GD-10. The learned initialization reduces the BER of
GD-10 throughout the entire synchronization period, helping it
synchronize faster than GD-10 with random initialization, and
BBB-DIAG-10. Even so, the EKF-based methods Lo-Fi and
CM-EKF synchronize much faster than the iterative methods,
both achieving near optimal error rates using only 256 samples.
BONG-EF, on the other hand, synchronizes slower than all other
methods, likely attributed to the noisy EF approximation.
For the COST2100 channel experiment (Fig. 9), the CM-EKF
outperforms all other methods across all SNR values, with
BONG-EF coming in as a close second at high SNR. These
full-covariance single-step approaches are consistently able to
leverage the limited observations to more effectively adapt the
receiver parameters to the varying channel conditions. However,
BONG-EF requires significantly more time to synchronize with
the channel, due to the inherent instability introduced by using
the EF approximation instead of the Hessian. By contrast, Lo-Fi
synchronizes faster than any other method, thanks to its lighter
yet still expressive parameterization. When tracking, Lo-Fi does
fall short of CM-EKF and BONG-EF, but runs a lot faster.
BBB-DIAG-10 and GD-10 show comparable performance: both
manage to adapt during the synchronization period, but fail to
sustain low error rates in the subsequent tracking phase. This
degradation can be attributed to the noisy parameter updates
that occur when operating with scarce data.
In the nonlinear scenario (Fig. 10), the channel conditions
are substantially harsher, demanding highly accurate parameter
updates. In this setting, CM-EKF decisively outperforms all
other methods across all SNR values by several standard
deviations. It not only synchronizes more rapidly than most of
the alternatives except Lo-Fi, but it also consistently maintains
superior performance throughout the entire tracking period. In
comparison, Lo-Fi exhibits the second-best error rates during
tracking across all SNR values, further underlining the trade-off
between complexity and tracking performance. BONG-EF
exhibits slower synchronization and only marginally surpasses
the performance of GD-10. Meanwhile, BBB-DIAG-10
struggles to deliver stable tracking, failing to sustain reliable
performance under the severe nonlinear conditions.
We conclude our numerical study by examining the sensitivity
of the proposed online learning framework to the state evolution
hyperparameters. To that aim, we conduct an additional exper-
=== PAGE BREAK ===
12
0 256 512 768 1024
Pilot Index
10 3
10 2
10 1
BER
GD-10
Meta GD-10
BBB-DIAG-10
BONG-EF
Lo-Fi
CM-EKF
Full-CSI MMSE EQ
Fig. 8. BER vs. pilot index at SNR=4dB. Synchronization from streaming data, with four different Sionna narrowband linear channels.
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
SNR [dB]
10 4
10 3
10 2
Average Tracking BER
GD-10
BBB-DIAG-10
Lo-Fi
BONG-EF
CM-EKF
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Channel Snapshot
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
BER
1. GD-10
2. BBB-DIAG-10
3. Lo-Fi
4. BONG-EF
5. CM-EKF
Fig. 9. Learning from streaming data, COST2100 channel. Left: Average BER vs. SNR; Right: BER vs channel snapshot at SNR= 10dB.
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
SNR [dB]
3 × 10 2
4 × 10 2
6 × 10 2
Average Tracking BER
GD-10
BBB-DIAG-10
Lo-Fi
BONG-EF
CM-EKF
0 20 40 60 80 100
Channel Snapshot
10 2
10 1
BER
1. GD-10
2. BBB-DIAG-10
3. Lo-Fi
4. BONG-EF
5. CM-EKF
Fig. 10. Learning from streaming data, nonlinear QuaDRiGa channel. Left: Average BER vs. SNR; Right: BER vs channel snapshot at SNR= 12dB.
0.990 0.992 0.994 0.996 0.998 1.000
Memory Parameter 
10 1
Average Tracking BER
BBB-DIAG-10
Lo-Fi
BONG-EF
CM-EKF
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
Process Noise Variance 2
10 1
3 × 10 2
4 × 10 2
6 × 10 2
Average Tracking BER
BBB-DIAG-10
Lo-Fi
BONG-EF
CM-EKF
Fig. 11. Sensitivity to state evolution parameters, nonlinear QuaDRiGa channel at SNR= 12dB. Left: Average BER vs.γ; Right: Average BER vs.σ 2.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
13
iment using the nonlinear QuaDRiGa scenario at SNR= 12 dB,
and evaluate the average BER achieved by all the streaming-
data algorithms while varying the memory parameter γ and the
process noise variance σ2 governing the state evolution model.
The results, shown in Fig. 11, indicate that similar ranges of hy-
perparameters γ and σ2 provide favorable performance across all
the considered algorithms. This suggests that these parameters pri-
marily reflect the dynamics of the underlying channel evolution,
rather than the specific choice of the online learning algorithm.
Overall, the results highlight the interplay between the
different complexity–performance mechanisms discussed in
Subsection III-B. First, the structure imposed on the covariance
matrix determines the balance between expressiveness and
computational cost. Full-covariance tracking with CM-EKF
consistently yields the most reliable adaptation, particularly
in challenging or nonlinear scenarios, while the DLR and
diagonal approximations (A3) provide a favorable compromise
between latency and tracking accuracy, often synchronizing the
fastest; Second, replacing the Hessian with the empirical Fisher
approximation (A2) further reduces computational overhead,
but may introduce noisy updates that slow synchronization and
degrade stability compared to using EKF-type methods (A1).
Accordingly, practitioners seeking the highest robustness should
favor EKF-based variants (with CM-EKF offering the best
performance and Lo-Fi providing a fast and stable alternative),
whereas the empirical Fisher variant is most appropriate in
settings where minimizing online learning latency is the primary
concern and some loss in stability can be tolerated.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we proposed a modular online Bayesian
learning framework for deep receivers operating over time-
varying channels. By casting online learning as a state-space
tracking problem and adopting recursive Bayesian updates,
we demonstrated that reliable one-shot adaptation can be
achieved, replacing multi-epoch training with single-step updates.
Furthermore, by leveraging modular receiver architectures such
as DeepSIC, we showed how module-wise Bayesian adaptation
from streaming pilots enables parallelization and pipelining,
thereby substantially reducing both complexity and latency.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Gusakov, O. Simeone, T. Routtenberg, and N. Shlezinger, “Rapid online
Bayesian learning for deep receivers,” inIEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2025.
[2] C. Huang, S. Hu, G. C. Alexandropoulos, A. Zappone, C. Yuen, R. Zhang,
M. Di Renzo, and M. Debbah, “Holographic MIMO surfaces for 6G
wireless networks: Opportunities, challenges, and trends,”IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 118–125, 2020.
[3] Y . Liu, X. Liu, X. Mu, T. Hou, J. Xu, M. Di Renzo, and N. Al-Dhahir,
“Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: Principles and opportunities,”IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1546–1577, 2021.
[4] N. Shlezinger, G. C. Alexandropoulos, M. F. Imani, Y . C. Eldar, and D. R.
Smith, “Dynamic metasurface antennas for 6G extreme massive MIMO com-
munications,”IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 106–113, 2021.
[5] N. Lang, Y . Gabay, N. Shlezinger, T. Routtenberg, Y . Ghasempour, G. C.
Alexandropoulos, and Y . C. Eldar, “Wideband THz multi-user downlink
communications with leaky wave antennas,”IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 25, pp. 6921–6937, 2025.
[6] L. Dai, R. Jiao, F. Adachi, H. V . Poor, and L. Hanzo, “Deep learning
for wireless communications: An emerging interdisciplinary paradigm,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 133–139, 2020.
[7] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the
physical layer,”IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
563–575, 2017.
[8] N. Shlezinger, M. Ma, O. Lavi, N. T. Nguyen, Y . C. Eldar, and M. Juntti,
“Artificial intelligence-empowered hybrid multiple-input/multiple-output
beamforming: Learning to optimize for high-throughput scalable MIMO,”
IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 58–67, 2024.
[9] W. Tong and G. Y . Li, “Nine challenges in artificial intelligence and
wireless communications for 6G,”IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 140–145, 2022.
[10] T. Raviv, S. Park, O. Simeone, Y . C. Eldar, and N. Shlezinger, “Adaptive
and flexible model-based AI for deep receivers in dynamic channels,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 163–169, 2024.
[11] J. Xia, D. Deng, and D. Fan, “A note on implementation methodologies of
deep learning-based signal detection for conventional MIMO transmitters,”
IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 744–745, 2020.
[12] T. Raviv, A. Goldman, O. Vayner, Y . Be’ery, and N. Shlezinger,
“CRC-aided learned ensembles of belief-propagation polar decoders,”
inIEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 8856–8860.
[13] M. Honkala, D. Korpi, and J. M. Huttunen, “DeepRx: Fully convolutional
deep learning receiver,”IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6,
pp. 3925–3940, 2021.
[14] M. Goutay, F. A. Aoudia, J. Hoydis, and J.-M. Gorce, “Machine learning
for MU-MIMO receive processing in OFDM systems,”IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2318–2332, 2021.
[15] G. Liu, Z. Hu, L. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Xue, and M. Matthaiou, “A
hypernetwork based framework for non-stationary channel prediction,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8338–8351, 2024.
[16] T. Raviv and N. Shlezinger, “Modular hypernetworks for scalable and
adaptive deep MIMO receivers,”IEEE Open Journal of Signal Processing,
vol. 6, pp. 256–265, 2025.
[17] M. Zecchin, K. Yu, and O. Simeone, “In-context learning for MIMO
equalization using transformer-based sequence models,” inIEEE
International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops),
2024, pp. 1573–1578.
[18] P. G. Chang, K. P. Murphy, and M. Jones, “On diagonal approximations to
the extended Kalman filter for online training of Bayesian neural networks,”
inContinual Lifelong Learning Workshop at ACML 2022, 2022.
[19] M. Jones, P. Chang, and K. Murphy, “Bayesian online natural gradient
(BONG),”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
pp. 131 104–131 153, 2024.
[20] G. Duran-Martin, L. S ´anchez-Betancourt, A. Y . Shestopaloff, and
K. Murphy, “A unifying framework for generalised Bayesian online
learning in non-stationary environments,”Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2025.
[21] J. Durbin and S. J. Koopman,Time series analysis by state space methods.
OUP Oxford, 2012, vol. 38.
[22] N. Shlezinger, N. Farsad, Y . C. Eldar, and A. J. Goldsmith, “ViterbiNet:
A deep learning based Viterbi algorithm for symbol detection,”IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3319–3331, 2020.
[23] N. Shlezinger, R. Fu, and Y . C. Eldar, “DeepSIC: Deep soft interference
cancellation for multiuser MIMO detection,”IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1349–1362, 2021.
[24] N. Shlezinger and Y . C. Eldar, “Model-based deep learning,”Foundations
and Trends® in Signal Processing, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 291–416, 2023.
[25] S. Park, H. Jang, O. Simeone, and J. Kang, “Learning to demodulate
from few pilots via offline and online meta-learning,”IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 69, pp. 226 – 239, 2020.
[26] T. Raviv, S. Park, O. Simeone, Y . C. Eldar, and N. Shlezinger, “Online
meta-learning for hybrid model-based deep receivers,”IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 6415–6431, 2023.
[27] N. Uzlaner, T. Raviv, N. Shlezinger, and K. Todros, “Asynchronous online
adaptation via modular drift detection for deep receivers,”IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 4454–4468, 2025.
[28] F. A. Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “End-to-end learning for OFDM: From neural
receivers to pilotless communication,”IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1049–1063, 2021.
[29] M. B. Fischer, S. D ¨orner, S. Cammerer, T. Shimizu, H. Lu, and
S. Ten Brink, “Adaptive neural network-based OFDM receivers,” inIEEE
Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), 2022.
[30] R. Finish, Y . Cohen, T. Raviv, and N. Shlezinger, “Symbol-level online
channel tracking for deep receivers,” inIEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 8897–8901.
[31] L. Huang, W. Pan, Y . Zhang, L. Qian, N. Gao, and Y . Wu, “Data
augmentation for deep learning-based radio modulation classification,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 1498–1506, 2019.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
14
[32] T. Raviv and N. Shlezinger, “Data augmentation for deep receivers,”IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 8259–8274, 2023.
[33] O. Simeone,Machine Learning for Engineers. Cambridge University
Press, 2022.
[34] K. M. Cohen, S. Park, O. Simeone, and S. Shamai, “Bayesian active
meta-learning for reliable and efficient AI-based demodulation,”IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 5366–5380, 2022.
[35] M. Zecchin, S. Park, O. Simeone, M. Kountouris, and D. Gesbert, “Robust
Bayesian learning for reliable wireless AI: Framework and applications,”
IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 897–912, 2023.
[36] T. Raviv, S. Park, O. Simeone, and N. Shlezinger, “Uncertainty-aware
and reliable neural MIMO receivers via modular Bayesian deep learning,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 11, pp. 17 637–17 651, 2025.
[37] S. Farquhar and Y . Gal, “A unifying Bayesian view of continual learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06494, 2019.
[38] J. Hoydis, S. Cammerer, F. Ait Aoudia, M. Nimier-David, L. Maggi,
G. Marcus, A. Vem, and A. Keller, “Sionna: An open-source library for
research on communication systems,” 2022, https://nvlabs.github.io/sionna/.
[39] L. Liu, C. Oestges, J. Poutanen, K. Haneda, P. Vainikainen, F. Quitin,
F. Tufvesson, and P. De Doncker, “The COST 2100 MIMO channel
model,”IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 92–99, 2012.
[40] S. Jaeckel, L. Raschkowski, K. B ¨orner, and L. Thiele, “Quadriga: A 3-D
multi-cell channel model with time evolution for enabling virtual field
trials,”IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3242–3256, 2014.
[41] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, “How much training is needed in
multiple-antenna wireless links?”IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 4,
pp. 951–963, 2003.
[42] K. T. Truong and R. W. Heath, “Effects of channel aging in massive
mimo systems,”Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. 338–351, 2013.
[43] A. G. Wilson and P. Izmailov, “Bayesian deep learning and a probabilistic
perspective of generalization,”Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, pp. 4697–4708, 2020.
[44] V . Fortuin, “Priors in Bayesian deep learning: A review,”International
Statistical Review, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 563–591, 2022.
[45] Y . Gal, J. Hron, and A. Kendall, “Concrete dropout,”Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[46] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight
uncertainty in neural network,” inInternational Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2015, pp. 1613–1622.
[47] J. Gawlikowski, C. R. N. Tassi, M. Ali, J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng,
A. Kruspe, R. Triebel, P. Jung, R. Roscheret al., “A survey of uncertainty
in deep neural networks,”Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no. Suppl
1, pp. 1513–1589, 2023.
[48] N. Shlezinger, Y . C. Eldar, and S. P. Boyd, “Model-based deep learning:
On the intersection of deep learning and optimization,”IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 115 384–115 398, 2022.
[49] W.-J. Choi, K.-W. Cheong, and J. M. Cioffi, “Iterative soft interference
cancellation for multiple antenna systems,” inProc. IEEE WCNC, 2000.
[50] F. Tronarp, A. F. Garc ´ıa-Fern´andez, and S. S ¨arkk¨a, “Iterative filtering and
smoothing in nonlinear and non-Gaussian systems using conditional mo-
ments,”IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 408–412, 2018.
[51] A. Papoulis and S. U. Pillai,Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic
Processes, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002, see p. 127.
[52] J. Martens, “New insights and perspectives on the natural gradient method,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, Jan. 2020.
[53] A. Mishkin, F. Kunstner, D. Nielsen, M. Schmidt, and M. E. Khan,
“SLANG: Fast structured covariance approximations for Bayesian deep
learning with natural gradient,” inAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2018.
[54] P. G. Chang, G. Dur´an-Mart´ın, A. Y . Shestopaloff, M. Jones, and K. Murphy,
“Low-rank extended Kalman filtering for online learning of neural networks
from streaming data,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19535, 2023.
[55] E. A. Wan and R. Van Der Merwe, “The unscented Kalman filter for
nonlinear estimation,” inIEEE Adaptive Systems for Signal Processing,
Communications, and Control Symposium, 2000, pp. 153–158.
[56] Z. Xia, A. Davtyan, and P. Favaro, “KOALA++: Efficient Kalman-based
optimization of neural networks with gradient-covariance products,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[57] P. Zhang, Q. Song, and F. Liang, “A Langevinized ensemble Kalman
filter for large-scale dynamic learning,”Statistica Sinica, vol. 34, pp.
1071–1091, 2024.
[58] G. Evensen, “The ensemble Kalman filter: Theoretical formulation and prac-
tical implementation,”Ocean dynamics, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 343–367, 2003.
[59] P. Zhang, T. Dong, and F. Liang, “An extended Langevinized ensemble
Kalman filter for non-Gaussian dynamic systems,”Computational statistics,
vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 3347–3372, 2024.
[60] T. Dong, P. Zhang, and F. Liang, “A stochastic approximation-Langevinized
ensemble Kalman filter algorithm for state space models with unknown
parameters,”Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 448–469, 2023.
[61] M. Zinkevich, “Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal
gradient ascent,” inInternational Conference on International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2003, p. 928–935.
[62] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” inIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[63] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
adaptation of deep networks,” inInternational Conference on Machine
Learning, 2017, p. 1126–1135.
Yakov Gusakovreceived his dual B.Sc. in Electrical
Engineering and Mathematics (with highest honors)
in 2024, and his M.Sc. in Electrical Engineering in
2025, both from Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Be’er Sheva, Israel. His M.Sc. research, conducted
under the supervision of Prof. Tirza Routtenberg
and Dr. Nir Shlezinger, focuses on Bayesian online
learning for wireless deep receiver design.
Osvaldo Simeoneis the Professor of Information
Engineering at Northeastern University London, where
he co-directs the Institute for Intelligent Networked
Systems (INSI). He is also a visiting Professor with
the Connectivity Section within the Department of
Electronic Systems at Aalborg University. Previously,
he was with the Department of Engineering of King’s
College London from 2017 to 2025, and with the Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Department at
New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) from 2006
to 2017. He received an M.Sc. degree (with honors) and
a Ph.D. degree in information engineering from Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy,
in 2001 and 2005, respectively. His research interests include information theory,
machine learning, wireless communications, neuromorphic computing, and quan-
tum machine learning. Dr Simeone is a co-recipient of the 2025 IEEE ICC Best
Paper Award, the 2022 IEEE Communications Society Outstanding Paper Award,
the 2021 IEEE Vehicular Technology Society Jack Neubauer Memorial Award,
the 2019 IEEE Communication Society Best Tutorial Paper Award, the 2018 IEEE
Signal Processing Best Paper Award, the 2017 JCN Best Paper Award, the 2015
IEEE Communication Society Best Tutorial Paper Award and of the Best Paper
Awards of IEEE SPAWC 2007 and IEEE WRECOM 2007. He was awarded an
Advanced grant by the European Research Council (ERC) in 2025, an Open Fel-
lowship by the EPSRC in 2022, and a Consolidator grant by the ERC in 2016. His
research has been also supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF),
the European Commission, the European Research Council (ERC), the Engineer-
ing & Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund, the European Space Agency, as well as by a number of indus-
trial collaborations including with Intel Labs and InterDigital. He was the Chair of
the Signal Processing for Communications and Networking Technical Committee
of the IEEE Signal Processing Society in 2022, as well as of the UK & Ireland
Chapter of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 2017 to 2022. He was a
Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Communications Society in 2021 and 2022,
and he was a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Information Theory Society in
2017 and 2018. Prof. Simeone is the author of the textbooks ”Machine Learning
for Engineers” and ”Classical and Quantum Information Theory” published by
Cambridge University Press, four monographs, two edited books, and more than
200 research journal and magazine papers. He is a Fellow of the IET and IEEE.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
15
Tirza Routtenberg(Senior Member, IEEE) is a
Professor in the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Israel. She received the B.Sc. degree in biomedical
engineering from the Technion–Israel Institute of Tech-
nology, Haifa, Israel, in 2005, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, in 2007
and 2012, respectively. From 2012 to 2014, she was a
Postdoctoral Fellow with the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY ,
USA. Since 2014, she has been with Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. In 2022–
2023, she was a William R. Kenan, Jr. Visiting Professor for Distinguished Teach-
ing at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Her research interests include
statistical signal processing, estimation and detection theory, signal processing in
smart grids, and graph signal processing. She served as an Associate Editor for the
IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks(2019–
2023) andIEEE Signal Processing Letters(2021–2025). She has been a Subject
Editor forSignal Processing(Elsevier) since 2024. She also served as a Member
of the IEEE Signal Processing Society Education Board (2023–2025) and is a
member of the IEEE Signal Processing Theory and Methods Technical Committee.
She was a recipient or co-recipient of Best Student Paper Awards at ICASSP 2011,
CAMSAP 2013, ICASSP 2017, and SSP 2018. She received the Marc Rich Foun-
dation Prize in 2012 and the Toronto Prize for Excellence in Research in 2021.
Nir Shlezinger(M’17-SM’23) is an associate profes-
sor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering at Ben-Gurion University, Israel. He received
his B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in 2011, 2013,
and 2017, respectively, from Ben-Gurion University,
Israel, all in electrical and computer engineering. From
2017 to 2019, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the
Technion, and from 2019 to 2020, he was a postdoc-
toral researcher at the Weizmann Institute of Science,
where he was awarded the FGS Prize for his research
achievements. He is the recipient of the 2024 IEEE
ComSoc Fred W. Ellersick Award, the 2025 IEEE ComSoc Marconi Prize, and the
2024 Krill Prize for outstanding young researchers. His research interests include
communications, information theory, signal processing, and machine learning.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
