                                                                                                                                                                                     1



                                                 SICNN: Soft Interference Cancellation Inspired
                                                         Neural Network Equalizers
                                            Stefan Baumgartner Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Oliver Lang Member, IEEE, and
                                                                  Mario Huemer Senior Member, IEEE


                                                                                                           Abstract
                                                      In recent years data-driven machine learning approaches have been extensively studied to replace or enhance
arXiv:2308.12591v2 [eess.SP] 11 Mar 2024




                                                 traditionally model-based processing in digital communication systems. In this work, we focus on equalization
                                                 and propose a novel neural network (NN-)based approach, referred to as SICNN. SICNN is designed by deep
                                                 unfolding a model-based iterative soft interference cancellation (SIC) method. It eliminates the main disadvantages
                                                 of its model-based counterpart, which suffers from high computational complexity and performance degradation
                                                 due to required approximations. We present different variants of SICNN. SICNNv1 is specifically tailored to single
                                                 carrier frequency domain equalization (SC-FDE) systems, the communication system mainly regarded in this work.
                                                 SICNNv2 is more universal and is applicable as an equalizer in any communication system with a block-based
                                                 data transmission scheme. Moreover, for both SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, we present versions with highly reduced
                                                 numbers of learnable parameters. Another contribution of this work is a novel approach for generating training
                                                 datasets for NN-based equalizers, which significantly improves their performance at high signal-to-noise ratios.
                                                 We compare the bit error ratio performance of the proposed NN-based equalizers with state-of-the-art model-
                                                 based and NN-based approaches, highlighting the superiority of SICNNv1 over all other methods for SC-FDE.
                                                 Exemplarily, to emphasize its universality, SICNNv2 is additionally applied to a unique word orthogonal frequency
                                                 division multiplexing (UW-OFDM) system, where it achieves state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, we present
                                                 a thorough complexity analysis of the proposed NN-based equalization approaches, and we investigate the influence
                                                 of the training set size on the performance of NN-based equalizers.

                                                                                                         Index Terms
                                                      Equalization, neural networks, single carrier frequency domain equalization, soft interference cancellation,
                                                 training set generation


                                                                                        I. I NTRODUCTION

                                           D     IGITAL communications at the physical layer level is traditionally a quite model-based discipline.
                                                 That is, especially for the receiver processing blocks of digital communication systems, most al-
                                           gorithms have been developed based on physical and statistical models of the communication chain.
                                           With this established approach well interpretable methods can be obtained, their performance bounds
                                           can often be specified, and usually algorithms achieving optimal performance for the given models can
                                           be derived. Besides these advantageous properties, model-based approaches also have some downsides.
                                           Performance-optimal methods can in some cases exhibit an infeasible computational complexity, requiring
                                           the application of suboptimal algorithms in practice. Further, modeling errors, wrong (or oversimplified)
                                           assumptions, or insufficient model knowledge may lead to a considerable performance degradation. Since
                                           with data-driven machine learning methods many of the drawbacks of model-based approaches can be
                                           resolved, currently intensive research is conducted on machine learning approaches for several applications
                                           in communications engineering. This includes possible future scenarios like communications assisted
                                           by reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RISs) [2], molecular communications [3], or integrated sensing
                                              This work has been supported by the “University SAL Labs” initiative of Silicon Austria Labs (SAL) and its Austrian partner universities
                                           for applied fundamental research for electronic based systems. This paper was presented in part at the 2022 IEEE 23rd International Workshop
                                           on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communication (SPAWC), Oulo, Finland, 2022 [1].
                                              Stefan Baumgartner and Mario Huemer are with the JKU LIT SAL eSPML Lab, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria, and with the
                                           Institute of Signal Processing, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria (e-mails: {stefan.baumgartner, mario.huemer}@jku.at).
                                              Oliver Lang is with the Institute of Signal Processing, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria (email: oliver.lang@jku.at).
                                                                                                           2



and communication [4]. However, also in traditional wireless communication systems promising results
can be achieved by means of machine learning. This involves completely abandoning the block-based
paradigm of current digital communication system design with the help of end-to-end learning [5], [6],
or replacing / enhancing individual blocks of a standard communication chain [7]–[9]. The latter includes
machine learning approaches for channel estimation [10], [11], channel decoding [12], and self-interference
cancellation [13]–[15]. In this work, we regard another important processing block at the receiver, namely
equalization. Equalization, also referred to as data estimation, is the task of reconstructing transmitted
data – distorted during transmission over a channel – at the receiver side of a communication system.
Typically, equalization is conducted by model-based methods. However, also with machine learning
methods auspicious results have already been demonstrated [16]–[25]. In current publications on machine
learning approaches for data estimation, mainly neural networks (NNs) are employed. NNs are known to be
universal function approximators [26] and thus are expected to approximate the optimal data estimators.
Many of the presented results are promising, but there are also some new challenges arising. More
specifically, standard NNs like a fully-connected feedforward NN (FCNN) are black-box approaches, i.e.,
their inference is not interpretable, performance bounds can hardly be derived, and domain knowledge is
not exploited. Especially due to the latter fact most NNs suffer from requiring large amounts of training
data and a high inference complexity. Optimally, one can fuse model-based and data-driven approaches
by, e.g., incorporating existing model knowledge into NNs, which is expected to lead to less complex
and better performing NNs than the standard black-box NNs. One possibility of incorporating model
knowledge into NNs is to design their layer structure accordingly, which leads to NNs we refer to as
model-inspired NNs. Currently, one of the most promising and most popular approaches for obtaining
NNs with a model-inspired layer structure is deep unfolding [27]. The idea of deep unfolding is to take a
model-based iterative algorithm, which is conceived for finding the solution of an optimization problem,
fix its number of iterations, and unfold every iteration to a layer of an NN. Depending on the aspired
abstraction level of the NN (i.e., the similarity between the model-based algorithm and the NN), only a
few parameters of the model-based iterative algorithm (e.g., its step size) or even whole parts are replaced
by learnable parameters or modules, respectively. Those can then be optimized with tools known from
NN optimization by utilizing available training data. A number of NN-based data estimators, e.g., the
NNs in [18], [20], [22]–[25] are designed by employing deep unfolding. In this work, we also apply deep
unfolding for the design of our proposed NN-based equalizers.
   Most NN-based data estimators are currently proposed for equalization in multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) communication systems, often assuming data transmission over an uncorrelated Rayleigh fading
channel. In this work, the developed NN-based equalizers are mainly evaluated for single carrier frequency
domain equalization (SC-FDE) systems [28], [29]. In an SC-FDE system, a single carrier transmission
scheme is utilized, but the payload data is transmitted in a block-wise manner with guard intervals between
successive blocks, as it is the case in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems. The
received blocks are transformed to frequency domain before conducting matched filtering, downsampling,
and equalization. This allows an efficient receiver implementation [29] and results in a system model
similar to that of an OFDM system. In this work, we regard employing both a cyclic prefix (CP) and a
so-called unique word (UW), which is a known deterministic sequence, as guard interval. The UW can
advantageously be utilized, e.g., for synchronization purposes [30], however, at the cost of equalization
complexity. For a CP guard interval, the optimal linear equalizer is a low-complex single-tap equalizer,
while for a UW guard interval, in turn, the optimal linear equalizer is more complex. In contrast to
CP-OFDM systems, for SC-FDE optimal performance can only be obtained with computationally highly
demanding nonlinear equalizers. This motivates developing NN-based data estimators for SC-FDE systems.
Employing NN-based equalizers for SC-FDE systems necessitates, in contrast to MIMO systems over
uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channels, an additional pre-processing step. As extensively described in [31],
for the application of NN-based equalizers in SC-FDE systems a data normalization scheme is required
for a well-behaved NN training and thus a satisfying performance of the NN equalizers. We also briefly
review the necessary data normalization scheme in this work.
                                                                                                                                 3



Contribution
   In this work, we propose the NN-based data estimators SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, which are designed
by unfolding an iterative soft interference cancellation (SIC) method [32]. The main idea of iterative SIC
is that in each iteration every single data symbol in the transmitted data vector is estimated on its own, by
considering the influence of all other data symbols in the data vector as interference. This interference can
be mitigated by incorporating estimates of the data symbols from the previous into the current iteration.
By that, the data symbol estimates are refined from iteration to iteration. Although also DeepSIC [23]
is inspired by the same iterative SIC method, SICNNv1 and SICNNv2 are fundamentally different from
this NN. The idea of SIC is adopted by DeepSIC concerning its structure. That is, DeepSIC consists of
multiple stages, where each stage is comprised of as many sub-FCNNs as there are data symbols in the
transmitted data vector. Each of the sub-FCNNs is utilized to estimate one data symbol, whereby the
input data of a sub-FCNN is made up of the received vector as well as of estimates provided by the
sub-FCNNs for the remaining data symbols from the last stage. All estimates are refined stage by stage.
That is, DeepSIC has similarities with the model-based SIC method only by refining the estimates of
the posterior data symbol probabilities, but neither interference cancellation is conducted in a stage, nor
model knowledge is utilized. In contrast, our proposed NN-based equalizers are far more similar to the
underlying model-based method. More specifically, with SICNNv1 – an adapted version of an NN-based
equalizer called SICNN proposed in our previous work [1] – we try to resemble the model-based iterative
SIC method closely. However, we replace numerically demanding, computationally intensive operations,
for which also approximations have to be made in the model-based approach, by low-complex NNs. This
NN-based approach achieves significantly better performance than the corresponding model-based method,
while exhibiting lower complexity. We tailor SICNNv1 for being employed as an NN-based equalizer in
an SC-FDE system by exploiting some properties of this communication system in the NN architecture
design. SICNNv2, in turn, is more abstracted from the model-based iterative SIC method, i.e., less model
knowledge is utilized for the NN architecture design. However, it is more universal and can also be
applied as an equalizer in any communication system with a block-based data transmission scheme. A
further difference between DeepSIC and the proposed SICNNv1 and SICNNv2 is their generalization
ability regarding different channels. As it is the case for, e.g., MMNet [21] or ViterbiNet [33], DeepSIC is
trained for one specific channel. This generally allows lower complex NNs, but requires retraining as soon
as the channel changes. SICNNv1 and SICNNv2 belong, like DetNet [18] or OAMP-Net [20], to the group
of NN-based data estimators, which are trained with different channels sampled from a statistical channel
model, and use the actual channel realization as an input. These NNs generally require an extensive offline
training, and exhibit a higher computational inference complexity, but they do not have to be retrained as
long as the specified statistical channel model is valid for the operating environment.
   Since in every stage1 of SICNNv1/SICNNv2 the same task has to be fulfilled, namely to refine estimated
posterior data symbol probabilities, we additionally introduce two modified versions of SICNNv1 and
SICNNv2. While in SICNNv1 and SICNNv2 for every stage different sub-NNs are utilized to estimate
posterior data symbol probabilites, in SICNNv1Red and SICNNv2Red every stage uses the same sub-NNs,
which drastically reduces the number of parameters to be trained.
   We compare the proposed NN-based equalizers with state-of-the-art model-based and NN-based data
estimators concerning achieved bit error ratio (BER) performance, and regarding their computational
complexity during inference. The evaluation is conducted for SC-FDE systems, either employing a UW
or a CP as a guard interval, for both quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) and 16-QAM (quadrature
amplitude modulation) alphabets, and with perfect and imperfect channel knowledge at the receiver. We
investigate the required amount of training data for achieving satisfying performance of selected NN-
based equalizers, pointing out the advantage of reducing the number of learnable parameters of an NN.
  1
    In order to avoid any misunderstandings, we refer to one unfolded iteration of the model-based iterative SIC method as stage of
SICNNv1/SICNNv2 instead of layer.
                                                                                                                                         4



Further, we demonstrate the universal applicability of SICNNv2 by presenting its achieved performance
for a communication system employing the so-called UW-OFDM signaling scheme.
   As another important contribution of this paper, we present a novel approach to generate training sets for
NN-based equalizers. In this approach, only those sample data transmissions are included in the training
set for which the number of data symbol estimation errors made by a baseline equalizer exceeds a specified
quantity. This greatly enhances the performance of NN-based data estimators at high signal-to-noise ratios
(SNRs).
   The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II, we review the SC-FDE signaling
scheme and data transmission model, and we discuss state-of-the-art model-based equalizers, including in
particular the iterative SIC method our NN-based equalizers are inspired by. In Sec. III, the novel NN-based
equalizers are introduced and discussed in detail. Further, we propose a novel approach for generating
training datasets for NN-based data estimators in Sec. IV. We present BER performance results, and an
in-depth analysis of the computational complexity of the regarded model-based and NN-based equalizers
in Sec. V.

Notation
   Throughout this paper, we use lower-case bold face letters x for vectors and upper-case bold face letters
X for matrices, xk for the kth element of x, [X]kj for the element of X in row k and column j, and
[X]k∗ for the kth row of X. Further, (.)T , (.)H , and (.)∗ indicate transposition, conjugate transposition,
and conjugation respectively, while |X| is the determinant of the matrix X. We denote the probability
density function (PDF) of a continuous random variable as p(.), the probability mass function (PMF) of a
discrete random variable as p[.], a conditional PMF of a random variable a given b as p[a|b], and a PMF
evaluated at the value ã as p[a = ã]. We describe the expectation operator averaging over the PDF/PMF
of a random variable a as Ea [.], where the subscript of the expectation operator is omitted when the
averaging PDF/PMF is clear from context.
                                           II. P RELIMINARIES
  In this section, we describe the system model for SC-FDE, and state-of-the-art model-based equalization
approaches. Further, we discuss an iterative SIC approach for data estimation, and we highlight some
properties of this method.

A. Single Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization
    In an SC-FDE communication system [28], [29], [34], [35], a single carrier modulation scheme is
employed for data transmission. At the transmitter, the data symbols to be transmitted, which are drawn
from a modulation alphabet S (in this work, we mainly use QPSK as a modulation alphabet), are grouped
into blocks of length Nd . These blocks of data symbols, which we refer to as data vectors d ∈ SNd , are
strung together to generate a transmit data burst, whereby they are separated by guard intervals of length
Ng . As a guard interval, in this work we consider using either a CP or a UW, which is a deterministic
sequence known by the receiver. Depending on the employed guard interval, some processing steps in
the receiver are different, which are described later in this section. The transmit data burst is upsampled
and pulse shaped with a root-raised-cosine (RRC) filter, followed by transmitting the resulting signal over
a multipath channel, which is additionally disturbed by additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). At the
receiver, the first processing step depends on the employed guard interval. While for a UW guard interval
every received data vector including its succeeding guard interval is transformed individually to frequency
domain, for a CP guard interval the CPs are removed first before transforming the remaining received
data vectors individually to frequency domain. In frequency domain, the further processing steps matched
filtering, downsampling, and equalization are conducted. Independent of the employed guard interval, the
general model2 of the transmission of a data vector up to the input of the equalizer in the equivalent
  2
    Here we assume sufficiently long guard intervals such that each data block can be processed individually and independently of all other
transmitted data blocks.
                                                                                                            5



complex baseband can be written as [36]
                                                 e N′x + w .
                                            yr = HF                                                       (1)
              N′
Here, yr ∈ C is the received vector after matched filtering and downsampling in frequency domain,
where N ′ depends on the employed guard interval and is being specified later in this section. He ∈ RN ′ ×N ′
is a diagonal matrix containing the sampled frequency response of the cascade of upsampler, pulse shaping
filter, multipath channel, matched filter, and downsampler on its main diagonal. Note, that H    e is a real-
valued matrix since we conduct optimal matched filtering in frequency domain, i.e., the filter is matched to
the channel distorted transmit pulse (for further details on optimal matched filtering in SC-FDE systems,
                                                   ′   ′
we refer to [37], [38]). Furthermore, FN ′ ∈ CN ×N is the N ′ -point discrete Fourier transform (DFT)
                               e is circularly symmetric complex AWGN, with σ 2 being the variance of
matrix and w ∼ CN (0, N ′ σn2 H)
                                                                              ′
                                                                                    n
the AWGN in time domain. The structure of the transmitted vector x ∈ CN as well as the final system
model differ for UW and CP guard intervals, which we further detail in the following.
    1) Unique Word Guard Interval: As already mentioned, in case of a UW guard interval [34], [35], at
the receiver both a received data vector and its succeeding UW are transformed to frequency domain for
                                                         ′
the further processing steps. Hence, the vector x ∈ CN in (1) has the form x = [dT , uT ]T , where d ∈ SNd
is the transmitted data vector to be estimated, u ∈ CNg is the UW, and N ′ = N = Nd + Ng . Inserting
into (1) leads to
                                                        
                                                 e       d
                                            yr = HFN        +w.                                           (2)
                                                         u
By assuming perfect channel knowledge on receiver side, the influence of the known UW u on the received
vector yr can be removed according to
                                            e ′ u = HM
                                       yr − HM      e uw d + w ,                                          (3)
with FN = [Muw M′ ], where Muw ∈ CN ×Nd and M′ ∈ CN ×Ng are built by the first Nd columns and the
remaining Ng columns of FN , respectively.
  2) Cyclic Prefix Guard Interval: In case of a CP guard interval [28], [29], the guard intervals are
removed at the receiver before transforming the received blocks of data to frequency domain, which
means that x in (1) is realized as the transmitted data vector d ∈ SNd , and N ′ = Nd . Consequently, for a
CP guard interval, the data transmission is modeled as
                                                 e N d+w.
                                            yr = HF                                                       (4)
                                                    d


   3) System Model for Single Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization: As elaborated above, the model
for data transmission in an SC-FDE system is given by (3) for a UW guard interval and by (4) for a CP.
For the ease of notation, in the remainder of this work the SC-FDE system model is given for both guard
intervals by
                                           e
                                       y = HMd + w = Hd + w ,                                             (5)
           ′        ′
                                   e
with y ∈ CN , M ∈ CN ×Nd , and H = HM,    where we employ for a
                 ′
  • UW guard: N = N = Nd + Ng , y = yr − HM e ′ u, M = Muw .
               ′
  • CP guard: N = Nd , y = yr , M = FNd .
                                                                                                                 6



   4) Model-Based Equalization: Based on (5), data estimation can be conducted for a given received
vector y and a channel matrix H. As thoroughly elucidated in [39], depending on the optimality criterion,
there exist different optimal equalizers. The bit-wise maximum a-posteriori (MAP) estimator yields for
every transmitted bit the bit value featuring the highest posterior probability. It is known to be the
optimal estimator regarding the bit error probability. The vector MAP, in turn, is optimal regarding the
error probability of the data vector estimate. However, the computational complexity of both of the
aforementioned estimators grows exponentially with the data vector length Nd , which makes them in
general prohibitive for practical applications. Hence, one usually has to resort to suboptimal linear or
nonlinear estimation methods.
   The best linear estimator in the Bayesian sense is the linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE)
estimator, which is given by [40]
                                               N σn2 −1 H
                                      He
                              d̂ = M HM + 2 I            M y = ELMMSE y ,                             (6)
                                                 σd
with I and σd2 being the identity matrix with appropriate dimensions and the variance of the symbol
alphabet, respectively. In case of a CP guard interval (M = FNd ), (6) can be simplified to [35]
                                     1              2 −1
                               d̂ = ′ MH H    e + σn I     y =
                                                                1 H
                                                                   M ELMMSE,dg y ,                          (7)
                                    N              σd2          N′
                                 
where ELMMSE,dg = H    e + σn22 I −1 is a diagonal matrix, and thus also the inversion required to compute this
                           σd
estimator matrix can be realized efficiently. Typically, instead of multiplying by N1′ MH , an inverse DFT
is conducted. Note, that this low-complex equalizer can also be employed for a UW guard interval when
applying LMMSE estimation to (2) instead of (3), i.e., the known UW u is not being removed before data
estimation, but is estimated as well. Compared to the LMMSE estimator (6), this approximate3 LMMSE
estimator allows a lower-complex equalization, however, at the cost of performance degradation [35].
   A popular suboptimal nonlinear estimator is the decision feedback equalizer (DFE), which is an
iterative method. There, in every iteration LMMSE estimation of the data symbol with the smallest error
variance is conducted, followed by removing the influence of the hard decision data symbol estimate
on the received vector. However, in case of wrong data symbol estimates, this method suffers from error
propagation deteriorating the estimation performance. For more details, we refer to [39], where the DFE is
elaborated for a so-called unique word orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (UW-OFDM) system.
In the following, we address another suboptimal nonlinear method, namely iterative soft interference
cancellation (SIC), in more detail, since the proposed NN-based equalizers are deduced from this model-
based approach.

B. Iterative Soft Interference Cancellation
   The idea of the iterative SIC method proposed in [32] is to estimate each data symbol dk , k ∈ {0, ..., Nd −
1}, in the data vector d separately, and refine the estimates from iteration to iteration. For the estimation of
the kth data symbol dk , all other data symbols dl , l ̸= k, are treated as interference, and thus their influence
on the received vector y is cancelled as far as possible. Since the data symbols dl are unknown, their
currently available estimates dˆl are utilized for interference cancellation. Interference cancellation reduces
the unknown variable to be estimated from an Nd -dimensional data vector d to a single data symbol dk ,
and thus nonlinear minimum mean square error (MMSE) estimation – which is generally computationally
infeasible for estimating d – can easily be applied for estimating dk . In order to prevent error propagation,
instead of using hard decision data symbol estimates for interference cancellation, soft information of every
data symbol estimate from the previous iteration is utilized in form of the MMSE estimate, which is the
posterior mean, and the corresponding conditional mean square error (MSE). The soft estimates are refined
 3
     By neglecting the knowledge about the UW, only an approximate LMMSE estimator is obtained.
                                                                                                                   7


Algorithm 1 Model-based iterative SIC for SC-FDE.
 1: function I TERATIVE S OFT IC SC-FDE(H, y, σn2 , σd2 )
       dˆk ← 0, ek ← σd2 ∀k = 0, ..., Nd − 1
         (−1)       (−1)
 2:
 3:    for q = 0, ..., Q − 1 do
 4:        for k = 0, ..., Nd − 1 do
                            (q)
 5:            Compute yic,k according to (11)
                             (q)
 6:            Compute Cvv,k following (12) for q = 0, or (14) for q > 0
                                              (q)
 7:            Evaluate posterior PMF p[dk |yic,k ]
               Update soft information: dˆk using (18) and ek via (19)
                                          (q)               (q)
 8:
 9:        end for
10:    end for
11:    return d̂(Q−1)
12: end function



iteratively. In [32], this approach is proposed for a MIMO system where all entries of the channel matrix
H are independent of each other (all entries of the channel matrix are modeled as independent random
variables following a normal distribution). This allows for simplifications in the iterative SIC method
that cannot be applied in general. In the following, we present the iterative SIC method following the
approach proposed in [32]. However, we adapt this method, which is also summarized in Algorithm 1,
for an SC-FDE system, where the assumption of independent elements of H is not fulfilled.
   Let us regard the qth iteration, q = 0, ..., Q − 1, of Q total iterations of the iterative SIC method. We
assume that for every data symbol dk , k ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1}, a soft estimate from the previous iteration
(q − 1) is available, namely, the MMSE data symbol estimate, which is the posterior mean
                                                            h          i
                                        dˆk
                                          (q−1)                  (q−1)
                                                = Ed |y(q−1) dk yic,k ,                                   (8)
                                                            k   ic,k

                                        (q−1)
and the corresponding MSE given yic,k
                                                        h                     i
                                                                (q−1) 2 (q−1)
                                            = Ed |y(q−1) dk − dˆk
                                    (q−1)
                                  ek                                   yic,k .                                  (9)
                                                 k   ic,k

        (q−1)
Here, yic,k is the received vector without the interference of all but the kth data symbol estimates in
iteration (q − 1). For the estimation of a data symbol dk , one can reformulate the system model (5) to
                                              y = hk dk + H̄k d̄k + w ,                                        (10)
where H̄k is H after removing the kth column hk , and d̄k is the data vector without the kth data symbol
dk . The term H̄k d̄k denotes the interference caused by all but the kth data symbol in the data vector,
which should ideally be removed from y for the estimation of dk . SIC can be conducted by removing
    ˆ (q−1) from y, leading to
H̄k d̄k
                                 (q)            ˆ (q−1) = h d −H̄ δ̄ (q−1) + w ,
                                yic,k = y − H̄k d̄                                                             (11)
                                                           k k
                                                   k
                                                               | k k{z       }
                                                                           (q)
                                                                          vk

       ˆ (q−1) consists of all but the kth data symbol estimates from iteration (q−1), and δ̄ (q−1) = d̄
where d̄                                                                                               ˆ (q−1) −d̄
         k                                                                                   k           k         k
contains the (unknown) data symbol estimation errors from the previous iteration step. For estimating dk
                                                           (q)
based on (11), the statistics of the total noise vector vk , which is composed of the Gaussian noise vector
w and the noise due to data symbol estimation errors, have to be specified. We start by considering the
noise statistics for the first iteration (q = 0). As we will elaborate later in this section, initializing the
data symbol estimates with the mean of the symbol alphabet is a rational choice, i.e., d̄     ˆ (−1) = 0, leading
                                                                                                k
                                                                                                               8


    (0)               (0)
to yic,k = y and δ̄k = −d̄k . Assuming independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data symbols with
uniform prior probability and reasonably large Nd , following central limit theorem arguments, H̄k d̄k can
be considered to follow a circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution with zero mean, and to
                                 (0)
be independent of w. Hence, vk approximately also follows a circularly symmetric complex Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and a covariance matrix
                                      (0) (0) H 
                             (0)
                           Cvv,k = E vk vk               e M̄k M̄H H
                                                   = σd2 H         e + N σ2H e,                       (12)
                                                                 k         n

where M̄k is the matrix M without the kth column. For all further iterations (q > 0), we start by specifying
                                                        (q−1)         (q−1)
the type of the statistical distribution of the vector rk     = H̄k δ̄k     . Based on central limit theorem
                                                                   (q−1)
arguments and unbiased MMSE estimates (cf. Appendix A), rk                can be approximated to follow a
circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution with zero mean, and thus the same assumption holds
     (q)                                                             (q)
for vk . As shown in Appendix A, the noise covariance matrix Cvv,k is given by
                                     (q)       e
                                   Cvv,k = H̄k E
                                                      (q−1)
                                                          H̄H           2e
                                                 k           k + N σn H
                                                                         (q−1) H 
                                              − H̄k E(d̄k |y,d̂(q−2) ),w δ̄k   w                            (13)
                                                                     (q−1) H  H
                                              − E(d̄k |y,d̂(q−2) ),w wδ̄k       H̄k ,
                                   (q−1) (q−1) H            
where E e (q−1) = E                               y, d̂(q−2) is the conditioned error covariance matrix. For the
          k         d̄k |y,d̂(q−2) δ̄k   δ̄k
off-diagonal entries of E   e (q−1) and for the third and the fourth term in (13) no exact closed form solution
                               k
is available. A possible workaround is to employ the approximation
                                            (q)               (q−1) 2e
                                           Cvv,k ≈ H̄k Ek  H̄H
                                                             k + N σn H ,                              (14)
         (q−1)          (q−1)     (q−1) (q−1)       (q−1) 
where Ek       = diag e0 , ..., ek−1 , ek+1 , ..., eNd −1 , i.e., correlations between the data symbol esti-
mates as well as correlations between the estimation errors and the AWGN noise are neglected. However,
this may lead to inaccuracies in the estimation process. Especially at high SNRs, for deep fading channels,
                                     (q−1)                                    (q)
and when q is increasing (then the ek      are usually becoming smaller), Cvv,k can become ill-conditioned,
which is – in combination with the occurring approximation errors – an issue for computing its inverse
required for the next steps in the estimation process.                         (q) 
   For computing a data symbol estimate dˆk , the posterior PMF p dk |yic,k is needed, which can be
                                               (q)

                                                                          (q)     
obtained via the Bayesian rule by utilizing the likelihood function p yic,k dk . Given the noise covariance
          (q)
matrix Cvv,k , the likelihood function follows to
                                (q)                   1                    (q) H    (q)−1    (q) 
                             p yic,k dk =            (q)
                                                                 exp − xk           Cvv,k xk
                                               π N |Cvv,k |
                                                (q) (q)
                                             = αk fk (dk ) ,                                               (15)
          (q)   (q)
with xk = yic,k − hk dk , a scaling factor
                                   (q)            1               (q) H (q)−1 (q) 
                                   αk =           (q)
                                                           exp − yic,k Cvv,k yic,k ,                       (16)
                                            π N |Cvv,k |
which is independent of dk , and a function
                             (q)                              (q)−1   (q)   (q) H     (q)−1           
                            fk (dk ) = exp d∗k hH
                                                k Cvv,k yic,k + yic,k Cvv,k hk dk
                                                        (q)−1                                             (17)
                                       · exp − d∗k hH
                                                    k Cvv,k hk dk
                                                                                                            9



depending on dk . With the above stated results at hand, the MMSE data symbol estimate dˆk and its
                                                                                         (q)
                    (q)
corresponding MSE ek can then be computed as
                                      (q) 
                                               X                (q) 
                          dˆk = E dk |yic,k =
                            (q)
                                                   s′ p dk = s′ yic,k
                                                        s′ ∈S
                                    P               (q)                P
                                          s ′
                                              p  y         d   = s  ′           ′ (q) ′
                                      ′
                                     s ∈S           ic,k     k           s′ ∈S s fk (s )
                                =   P             (q)                = P         (q) ′
                                                                                                        (18)
                                           p    y        d    = s ′
                                        ′
                                      s ∈S        ic,k     k              s′ ∈S fk (s )

and
                                                            P              (q) 2 (q)
                                      (q) 2 (q)                   s′ − dˆk fk (s′ )
                         ek = E dk − dˆk |yic,k =              s′ ∈S
                          (q)
                                                                   P       (q) ′
                                                                                      ,                 (19)
                                                                      ′  f
                                                                     s ∈S k   (s )
where a uniform prior PMF p[dk ] is assumed.
  Updating the data symbol soft estimates concludes one iteration. The succeeding iteration starts with
conducting SIC following (11).
  A quite interesting and not obvious result is verified in Appendix B, namely, that when using a zero
vector as initialization for the estimated data symbol vector, after one iteration the iterative SIC exhibits
the same hard decision bit error probability as the LMMSE estimator. Hence, we employ the zero vector,
which is also the prior mean of the data vector (since we assume a symmetric modulation alphabet and
uniformly distributed data symbol probabilities), as initialization of the iterative SIC method.

        III. S OFT I NTERFERENCE C ANCELLATION I NSPIRED N EURAL N ETWORK E QUALIZERS
   As already mentioned in Sec. II-B, the model-based SIC method suffers from the issue that the compu-
                                               (q)−1
tation of the inverse noise covariance matrix Cvv,k , also known as precision matrix, is computationally
and numerically demanding while approximations have to be made in addition. With our proposed NN
equalizers SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, whose layer structures are inspired by the iterative SIC method,
we aim to overcome the weaknesses of the model-based SIC method. However, the SIC operation from
the model-based method is preserved in the developed NNs, which is expected to help SICNNv1 and
SICNNv2 to provide reliable soft estimates (required, e.g., to compute log-likelihood ratios in case of
channel coded transmission), and allows to obtain interpretable intermediate quantities / variables inside
the NN-based equalizers. While the structure of SICNNv1 is very similar to the model-based method
and is specifically designed for SC-FDE communication systems, SICNNv2 is more general and can be
applied for any communication system, where the system model can be formulated as in (5) with any
matrix H. For both SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, we additionally present a version with a reduced number
of learnable parameters, since we exploit the knowledge that every stage of SICNNv1/SICNNv2 has to
provide estimates of the posterior data symbol probabilities, given the estimates of the previous stage
and the received vector, and thus should work with the same set of learnable parameters. The parameter-
reduced versions are referred to as SICNNv1Red and SICNNv2Red. Besides, in this section we also
briefly review a normalization scheme of the input data, which is required for a satisfying performance
of NN-based data estimators in SC-FDE systems.

A. SICNNv1
  The NN architecture is deduced by deep unfolding [27] the iterative SIC method described in Sec. II-B
to Q stages of SICNNv1. That is, every iteration of the model-based SIC method (the outer loop of
Algorithm 1), corresponds to one stage of SICNNv1. The steps conducted in one stage of SICNNv1,
which is schematically shown in Fig. 1, are very similar to those of the model-based method described in
Algorithm 1, however, the model-based computations in line 6 and line 7 of Algorithm 1, are accomplished
using data-driven FCNNs. Let us describe the structure of stage q of SICNNv1, q ∈ {0, ..., Q − 1}, in
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10



                                                    σn2
                                                                            (q)                                (q)−1
                                                                           g0                                Ĉvv,0
                                                    e
                                                    H                                                   2
                                                                 4                    FCNN 1         (.)
                                                     (q) H
                                                    a0                                                                                        (q)−1 (q)
                                                                                                                                       hH
                                                                                                                                        0 Ĉvv,0 yic,0
                                                                                                                                                                                         (q)
                       (q−1)                                                                                                                                                            p̂0,Re
                   e0                                                                                         h0                              (q)−1
  (q−1)                                                                                                                        5       hH
                                                                                                                                        0 Ĉvv,0 h0                    FCNN 2            (q)
                                                                                                                                                                                        p̂0,Im
p̂0,Re               (q−1)
                   dˆ0,Re

 (q−1)
              1      (q−1)
                   dˆ0,Im
p̂0,Im                                                                σn2                    (q)                                   (q)−1
                                                                                            gNd −1                              Ĉvv,Nd −1
                                                                      e
                                                                      H                                                  2
                                                                                      4              FCNN 1            (.)
                                                           3           (q) H
                                                                     aNd −1                                                                                        (q)−1       (q)
                                                                                                                                                          hH
                                                                                                                                                           Nd −1 Ĉvv,Nd −1 yic,Nd −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (q)
                                    (q−1)
                                   eNd −1
                                                       (q)
                                                      yic,0                                                                                                                                       p̂Nd −1,Re
                                                                                                                              hNd −1                      hH
                                                                                                                                                                   (q)−1
                                                                                                                                                           Nd −1 Ĉvv,Nd −1 hNd −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (q)
            (q−1)
          p̂Nd −1,Re                 (q−1)                                                                                                        5                                     FCNN 2    p̂Nd −1,Im
                                   dˆNd −1,Re

           (q−1)
                               1     (q−1)
                                   dˆNd −1,Im
          p̂Nd −1,Im
                                                                                                                                                        (q−1)    P|S |−1 (q−1)
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                      dˆk,Re/Im = l=0 sl p̂k,Re/Im,l
                                                                                                                                                 1               P                       2
                                                                                                                                                        (q−1)      |S0 |−1         (q−1)     (q−1)
                                                                     (q)                                                                              ek,Re/Im = l=0        sl − dˆk,Re/Im p̂k,Re/Im,l
                                                                  yic,Nd −1
                                                           2                                                                                     2     (q)            ˆ (q−1)
                                                                                                                                                      yic,k = y − H̄k d̄ k

                                                                                                                                                             P d −1 (q−1) H
                                                                                                                                                          (q) H
                                                                                                                                                 3    ak   = N  i=0,i6=k ei mi
                                                          H y                                                                                              h                n       o    n       oi
                                                                                                                                                       (q)                     (q) H        (q) H
                                                                                                                                                 4    gk = σn2 , diag H̃ , Re ak      , Im ak

                                                                                                                                                 5    Compute products specified at block outputs


Fig. 1. Schematic structure of one stage of SICNNv1.


more detail, starting at its input. The inputs of stage q are the received
                                                                         (q−1)vector y, the sampled frequency
                  e                                            (q−1)            T   (q−1) T T     (q−1)            ′
                                           2
response diag(H), the noise variance σn , and the vectors p̂k         = p̂k,Re , p̂k,Im        , p̂k     ∈ [0, 1]2|S | ,
k ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1}, where S′ = Re{S} = Im{S} (assuming a symmetric alphabet S). The elements
  (q−1)        (q−1)                   (q−1)      (q−1)
p̂k,Re,l and p̂k,Im,l of the vectors p̂k,Re and p̂k,Im , respectively, are the estimates of stage (q − 1) for
                                                             (q−1)                          (q−1) 
the data symbol posterior probabilities p Re{dk } = sl |yic,k         and p Im{dk } = sl |yic,k , respectively,
where sl ∈ S′ are the uniquely numbered symbols of S′ , l ∈ {0, ..., |S′ | − 1}. For the inputs of the first
                     (−1)    (−1)
stage (q = 0), p̂k,Re = p̂k,Im = |S1′ | 1 is chosen, i.e., the estimated posterior probabilities are initialized
uniformly, which represents the prior data symbol probability distribution. The values of the elements of
  (q)        (q)
p̂k,Re and p̂k,Im are updated in every stage following the procedure described below.
    Similar to the model-based method, in the first step ( 1 in Fig. 1) of the qth stage
                                                               |S′ |−1                                                       |S′ |−1
                                                               X                                                             X
                                                dˆk,Re =                                              dˆk,Im =
                                                  (q−1)                         (q−1)                   (q−1)                                  (q−1)
                                                                           sl p̂k,Re,l ,                                                   sl p̂k,Im,l ,                                             (20)
                                                                l=0                                                           l=0

and
                                                                                    q
                                                                (q−1)                        (q−1) 2                 (q−1) 2
                                                               ek     =                     ek,Re           + ek,Im                    ,                                                             (21)
with the estimated MSEs
                                                                                  |S′ |−1
                                                                                  X                (q−1) 2 (q−1)
                                                                                            sl − dˆk,Re/Im p̂k,Re/Im,l ,
                                                          (q−1)
                                                      ek,Re/Im =                                                                                                                                     (22)
                                                                                   l=0
                     (q−1)
are computed, where ek     is utilized as a reliability measure of the corresponding data symbol estimate.
Note that these quantities can be computed independently for every data symbol index k, and thus the
blocks 1 are drawn isolated from each other in Fig. 1.
                                                                                                                              11



  In a second step ( 2 in Fig. 1), model-based interference cancellation is carried out by computing
                                                   (q)            ˆ (q−1) ,
                                                  yic,k = y − H̄k d̄                                                        (23)
                                                                     k

using the data symbol estimates dˆ¯k,l = dˆl,Re + j dˆl,Im , l ∈ {0, ..., k − 1, k + 1, ..., Nd − 1} from stage
                                   (q−1)   (q−1)      (q−1)

            ˆ (q−1) .
(q − 1) for d̄  k
                                                                                        (q)−1
    Instead of computing (an approximate of) the precision matrix Cvv,k in a model-based fashion,
we estimate it by utilizing fully-connected feedforward layers, which we also refer to as sub-NNs. A
                                                                                                                      (q)−1
straightforward approach is to estimate the real and the imaginary part of the N 2 elements of Cvv,k . We
exploit two observations for both reducing the number of parameters to be estimated by a sub-NN and
ensuring that the estimated precision matrix satisfies the properties implied by its definition. Firstly, the
                          (q)
covariance matrix Cvv,k , and thus also its inverse, has to be a Hermitian, positive definite matrix. That
       (q)−1                                                        (q)−1       (q) H (q)             (q)
is, Cvv,k can be decomposed into the matrix product Cvv,k = Bk Bk , where Bk is the matrix to be
estimated by the sub-NNs. Secondly, our empirical investigations showed, that for the regarded SC-FDE
                                                      (q)−1
communication system a precision matrix Cvv,k exhibits significant non-zero values only on the major
and the first few minor diagonals, and thus can be approximated as a band matrix. In the initial version
                                                                                                            (q)
of SICNNv1 described in [1] (where it is simply referred to as SICNN), we specify Bk to be a lower
triangular matrix containing non-zero values only on the main diagonal and the first nmd minor diagonals,
where nmd ∈ N0 is a hyperparameter of SICNN, which tremendously reduces the number of non-zero
                   (q)                                                                                           (q)
elements of Bk to be estimated. The non-zero elements of the complex-valued matrix Bk are to be
estimated by two separate sub-NNs, using one sub-NN for the real part and one for the imaginary part.
As stated in [1], hyperparameter optimization turns out that the best equalization performance is achieved
with nmd = 0, i.e., the precision matrix is assumed to be a diagonal matrix. This insight motivates an
adaption of the architecture of SICNN for the structure of SICNNv1. As depicted in Fig. 1, a single sub-
                                                                              (q)−1
NN FCNN 1 is employed to estimate the major diagonal of Cvv,k . To ensure positive definiteness, the
                                                  (q)−1
final estimates of the major diagonal of Cvv,k are obtained by squaring the outputs of FCNN 1. FCNN 1
has nL,C hidden layers with nH,C neurons per hidden layer, ReLU activation functions, and a batch norm
layer after the input layer. For determining the required inputs of FCNN 1, we reconsider the computation
      (q)
of Cvv,k in (13) and the quantities involved there. Besides the terms describing correlations between w
and d̄ˆ (q−1) , only terms consisting of σ 2 , H,e and M̄k E  e (q−1) M̄H occur in (13). When replacing E        e (q−1) by its
        k
                      (q−1)
                                            n                    k       k
                                                                            (q−1)           PNd −1      (q−1)
                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                              (q)
approximation Ek , the latter term can be expressed as M̄k Ek M̄H                      k =            e
                                                                                             i=0,i̸=k i       m     H
                                                                                                                i i =: Ak ,
                                                                                                                 m
                                            (q)
with mi as the ith column of M. Ak is a Hermitian Toeplitz matrix, consequently it is already fully
                               (q) H         (q)        P d −1 (q−1) H
described by its first row ak          = Ak 0∗ = N         i=0,i̸=k ei     mi , where we exploit mi,0 = 1 for all i in
                                (q) H
the last step. The vectors ak , which are computed in block 3 , are concatenated in block 4 with σn2
and diag H     e to the input vector of FCNN 1
                                                                                       
                                    (q)
                                  gk = σn2 , diag H     e , Re a(q) H , Im a(q) H .                                         (24)
                                                                    k                k
                                                        (q)−1                                  (q) 
    With a given estimated precision matrix Ĉvv,k , the posterior PMF p dk |yic,k should be estimated.
Experiments, where the posterior PMF is computed as described in Sec. II-B in a model-based fashion
                                                                                                                            (q)−1
did not lead to satisfying performance. We assume a major reason for this issue is that the estimate Ĉvv,k
provided by FCNN1 is not precise enough to be treated as the exact precision matrix. Hence, we utilize
another
           sub-NN (FCNN 2 in Fig. 1), which is trained (jointly with FCNN1) to estimate the posterior PMF
          (q) 
p dk |yic,k and can cope with inaccuracies in the estimated precision matrix. More specifically, the output
                               (q)       (q) T (q) T T
of FCNN2 is the vector p̂k = p̂k,Re , p̂k,Im                (which is also the output of the qth SICNNv1 stage),
containing estimates for the data symbol posterior probabilities, as introduced earlier in this section. To
                                                                                                            12


                                                                                       (q) 
specify the required input quantities of FCNN 2 for estimating the posterior PMF p dk |yic,k , let us
consider its representation
                                                  (q)                   (q)
                                    (q)     p(yic,k |dk )          fk (dk )
                              p dk |yic,k = P          (q) ′
                                                                 = P         (q) ′
                                                                                     ,                 (25)
                                              ′
                                             s ∈S p(y  ic,k |s )      ′
                                                                     s ∈S kf    (s )
                                                                                                      (q)
by applying the Bayesian rule and assuming a uniform prior data symbol probability,         where fk (.)
                                                    (q)                               (q) 
is defined in (17). Due to the definition of fk (.), the posterior PMF p dk |yic,k depends only on
      (q)−1 (q)                                H (q)
                                                     −1
hHk Cvv,k yic,k , its complex conjugate, and hk Cvv,k hk . Therefore, the input vector of FCNN 2 is chosen
to be
                                (q)           (q)−1 (q)       H (q)−1 (q)
                               sk = Re hH   k Ĉvv,k yic,k , Im hk Ĉvv,k yic,k ,
                                              (q)−1   T                                              (26)
                                         hH
                                          k Ĉvv,k hk     ,
                        (q)
where the elements of sk are computed in block 5 . FCNN 2 consists of nL,Pr fully-connected hidden
layers with nH,Pr neurons per hidden layer, ReLU activation functions between each hidden layer, and a
batch norm layer after the input layer. Further, two independent softmax functions are utilized as output
                                  (q)       (q)                                                 (q)
activation functions to obtain p̂k,Re and p̂k,Im , which are concatenated to the stage output p̂k .
   An investigation of the inputs of sub-NN FCNN 2 as defined in (26) reveals a large variation of the
             (q)
values of sk , which depends on both the data symbol index k and the SICNNv1 stage index q. Hence,
                                                        (q)               (q) −1/2
in the qth SICNNv1 stage we suggest to multiply yic,k and hk by ||yic,k ||2 , which turns out to lead to
a more robust training procedure.
   In one stage, we use the same sub-NNs for estimating the precision matrix and the posterior data symbol
probabilities for all Nd data symbols to be estimated. However, different sub-NNs are utilized from stage
to stage, i.e. their learnable parameters are in general different to those of the sub-NNs of the remaining
stages, whereby the hyperparameters of the sub-NNs are the same for all stages.
   We optimize the parameters of SICNNv1 by employing a custom loss function based on the cross
entropy loss, which can be computed as

                                                    1 X
                                                             D−1
                                   fCE (α, β) := −       αd ln(βd ) ,
                                                   D d=0
                                       P        P
with any vectors α, β ∈ [0, 1]D and      d αd =   d βd = 1. More specifically, instead of utilizing only
the final output of SICNNv1 for computing the loss value, the custom loss is based on Q partial cross
entropy losses of all Q stage outputs, which are weighted by the corresponding stage index q. That is,
the employed custom loss function is given by
                                                  Q−1 N −1
                                             1 XX     d
                                                                                (q)
                              ℓ(doh , P̂) =                wq fCE (doh,k,Re , p̂k,Re )
                                            QNd q=0 k=0                                                (27)
                                                                 (q) 
                                             + fCE (doh,k,Im , p̂k,Im ) ,
               (q)        d −1 Q−1
                                                                                            PQ− 1
where P̂ := {p̂k,Re/Im }Nk=0    q=0
                                    is the collection of all stage outputs, wq = (q + 1)/ q=1     q is the
weighting factor of the partial losses, and doh,k,Re and doh,k,Im are one-hot vectors corresponding to the
real and imaginary part of a data symbol dk , respectively. This custom loss function is inspired by the
loss function employed for training DetNet [18] and by the auxiliary classifiers of GoogLeNet [41], and
should lead to a faster converging training.
                                                                                                                                                             13



                                 (q−1)
                             e0,Re
                                 (q−1)
            (q−1)            e0,Im
           p̂0,Re                                                                 (q)                      (q)
                                                                              z0                          p̂0,Re
                               (q−1)
                             dˆ0,Re                        σn2                                             (q)
            (q−1)
                        1                                               3                   FCNN          p̂0,Im
           p̂0,Im              (q−1)
                             dˆ0,Im                        h0
                                                            (q)
                                                           yic,0


                                              (q−1)
                                             eNd −1,Re
                                              (q−1)
                     (q−1)                   eNd −1,Im
                    p̂Nd −1,Re                                                                (q)                        (q)
                                                                                             zNd −1                     p̂Nd −1,Re
                                               (q−1)
                                             dˆNd −1,Re                     σn2                                          (q)
                     (q−1)
                                         1                                              3                  FCNN         p̂Nd −1,Im
                    p̂Nd −1,Im                 (q−1)
                                             dˆNd −1,Im                 hNd −1
                                                                         (q)
                                                                 2      yic,Nd −1
                                                                                                            (q−1)    P|S |−1 (q−1)
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          dˆk,Re/Im = l=0 sl p̂k,Re/Im,l
                                                                                                      1              P                       2
                                                                                                            (q−1)     |S0 |−1          (q−1)     (q−1)
                                                                                                          ek,Re/Im = l=0        sl − dˆk,Re/Im p̂k,Re/Im,l
                                                            H y
                                                                                                         (q)            ˆ (q−1)
                                                                                                      2 yic,k = y − H̄k d̄k

                                                                                                              (q)
                                                                                                      3 z(q)          (q) T   (q)       (q) T    (q)
                                                                                                         k = ρk Re{yic,k }, ρk Im{yic,k }, ρk Re{hk },
                                                                                                                                                         T

                                                                                                                  (q)    T   (q−1) (q−1)      (q) 2 2 T
                                                                                                                ρk Im{hk }, ek,Re , ek,Im , ρk σn


Fig. 2. Schematic structure of one stage of SICNNv2.


B. SICNNv2
   The first operations conducted in a stage of SICNNv2 are equivalent to those in a stage of SICNNv1.
                                                        (q−1)
That is, given the estimated posterior probabilities p̂k      from the previous stage (q−1), the corresponding
data symbol estimates dˆk,Re/Im and estimated MSEs ek,Re/Im are computed according to (20) and (22),
                          (q−1)                             (q−1)

respectively. With the data symbol estimates dˆk,Re/Im for all data symbols in the data vector at hand,
                                                    (q−1)

                                                                                        (q)
interference cancellation is conducted as a next step according to (23) to obtain yic,k . However, as shown
in Fig. 2, the remaining structure of a stage of SICNNv2 differs from the stage structure of SICNNv1.
Specifically, while the further inference steps conducted in a stage of SICNNv1 to obtain the stage output
are similar to the steps of the model-based algorithm, in an SICNNv2 stage an FCNN is employed for
directly estimating the posterior data symbol probabilities using the input vector
                               (q)   (q)     (q) T     (q)      (q) T     (q)
                             zk = ρk Re{yic,k }, ρk Im{yic,k }, ρk Re{hTk },
                                        (q)           (q−1) (q−1)      (q) 2   T
                                      ρk Im{hTk }, ek,Re , ek,Im , ρk σn2 ,
                                                (q)       (q)        −1/2
with a normalization factor ρk = ||yic,k ||2 . The estimated posterior data symbol probabilites are
                                    (q)    (q) T (q) T T
contained in the output vector p̂k = p̂k,Re , p̂k,Im       of the FCNN, which is also the output of the
qth stage of SICNNv2. The FCNN has nL hidden layers, nH neurons per hidden layer, a batch norm layer
after the input layer and every third hidden layer, and ReLU activation. SICNNv2 is trained with the same
loss function (27) as SICNNv1.
   The architecture of SICNNv2 is solely based on the idea of SIC, and is more universal than that of
SICNNv1 since no properties of an SC-FDE system are utilized. Hence, SICNNv2 can be employed for
equalization in other communication systems like, e.g., general MIMO systems or UW-OFDM systems.
However, for SC-FDE we expect a higher equalization complexity and maybe a worse BER performance
of SICNNv2 compared to SICNNv1 as less model knowledge is incorporated.

C. Parameter Reduction: SICNNv1Red and SICNNv2Red
  For reducing the number of parameters to be trained, we exploit the fact that in every stage of SICNNv1
and SICNNv2 the same task is fulfilled, namely, the posterior data symbol probabilities are to be estimated
                                                                                                                                     14



given the estimated posterior data symbol probabilities from the previous stage, the received vector,
the channel matrix, and the noise variance. Hence, we employ the same sub-NNs in every stage of
the NN-based equalizers, leading to the corresponding parameter-reduced versions SICNNv1Red and
SICNNv2Red. These parameter-reduced NNs can also be viewed as a single stage where its output is fed
back Q times.
   This NN architecture distinctly reduces the number of parameters to be optimized, which reduces the
computational effort for training, and is also supposed to lead to a more robust training procedure and a
smaller amount of training data to be required. However, it turns out that the employed loss function for
training the parameter-reduced NNs has to be slightly altered for obtaining a good performance. More
specifically, the outputs of the stages with higher stage index q are given a higher importance by changing
the weights wq of the loss function (27) for training SICNNv1Red and SICNNv2Red to
                                                              (q + 1)r
                                                         wq = PQ−1 ,                                                              (28)
                                                                      r
                                                                q=1 q

where r is a hyperparameter, which we choose for SC-FDE systems to be r = 4.

                     IV. T RAINING S ET G ENERATION AND DATA N ORMALIZATION
   In this section, we describe a novel approach for generating training sets for NN-based equalizers.
For the regarded SC-FDE systems, this approach considerably improves the performance of NN-based
equalizers at high SNRs. Further, we briefly describe a data normalization scheme specifically tailored
for SC-FDE, which was already presented in [31].

A. Training Set Generation
   The achieved BER performances of model-based and NN-based equalizers are generally evaluated in a
specified Eb /N0 interval, where Eb is the mean bit energy and N0 is the noise power spectral density on
receiver side, i.e., Eb /N0 is a measure for the SNR. To generate the training set for NN-based equalizers,
typically sample data transmissions over channel realizations4 drawn from a statistical channel model are
conducted, where Eb /N0 for the data transmission is selected randomly with a uniform distribution within
a specified range, short training SNR range. The upper and lower limits of the training SNR range are
typically hyperparameters, which are to be selected carefully, since they have a significant influence on
the performance of trained NN-based equalizers [39], [42], [43]. Despite a careful selection of the training
SNR range, the issue of “flattening out” BER curves can occur. That is, although NN-based equalizers
perform well for a wide Eb /N0 range, at higher Eb /N0 values, and thus low BERs (of, e.g., 10−5 or
10−6 ), their BER curves do not fall as steeply as those of many model-based equalizers. Although this
issue occurs for most NN-based equalizers (shown, e.g., in [31], [44]), interestingly, there are only very
few works like [43], where proper training of NN-based equalizers is addressed. In this work, we propose
a novel approach for the generation of training sets for NN-based equalizers. By training NN-based data
estimators with these specifically generated training sets, the issue of flattening out BER curves at high
SNRs can be mitigated significantly.
   Typically, even low complex equalizers like the LMMSE equalizer achieve low BERs at high SNRs (as
it can be seen, e.g., in Fig. 4, where the LMMSE estimator achieves a BER of 5·10−5 at Eb /N0 = 14 dB).
In other words, the decision boundaries of the baseline LMMSE equalizer and the optimal bit-wise MAP
equalizer differ only slightly. That is, by randomly generating data transmissions for the training set at high
SNRs, for those data transmissions even with the baseline LMMSE estimator only very few data symbol
estimation errors occur. However, the NN-based equalizers are expected to approximate the optimal bit-
wise MAP estimator. Hence, for NN training, exactly those few received data symbols are of interest,
  4
    These channel realizations are not used for evaluation, but the same statistical channel model is used to generate channels used for
evaluation.
                                                                                                              15



where with the baseline LMMSE estimator a wrong estimate is obtained for the corresponding transmitted
data symbol, while the optimal estimator still achieves a correct data symbol estimate. Since only a few
of those important received data symbols are contained in the training set when generating the training
data randomly, their influence on the training loss of the NN is small, leading to the aforementioned issue
of flattening out BER curves. With the aforementioned observations in mind, we suggest the following
method for generating the training set of NN-based equalizers for SC-FDE systems: instead of randomly
selecting an SNR value within the SNR training range for the transmission of every data burst that is
contained in the training set, we define an evenly spread grid on the SNR training range (on a linear
scale). The number of grid points coincides with the number of channels over which data transmissions
are to be conducted to generate the training set. For every SNR grid point, a channel realization is drawn
from the assumed statistical channel model, and a burst of Nburst data vectors d is transmitted over this
channel. The corresponding received vectors y are equalized using a baseline LMMSE estimator. Instead
of including all data vectors of the transmitted burst in the training set, only those are retained where
the baseline equalizer produces at least Nepd errors per data vector. Since particularly at higher SNRs
the number of retained data vectors is generally far lower than Nburst , another burst of data vectors is
generated and transmitted over the same channel, again followed by keeping only the data vectors where
at least Nepd errors per data vector are produced by the baseline estimator. This procedure is repeated
until Nburst data vectors are found for the specific channel, which are then included in the training set.
However, for flat channels, even with the baseline equalizer no or too few errors occur such that no data
vectors are found which could be included in the training set. Therefore, a stopping criterion has to be
introduced, where after Ncheck burst generations the number of retained data vectors is checked. If the the
number of retained data vectors is smaller than, e.g., 0.1Nburst , the current channel realization is discarded.
While keeping the SNR value corresponding to the specified SNR grid point, a new channel realization is
drawn from the statistical channel model, and the same data vector selection process as described above
is carried out. The parameters for the training set generation depend on the communication system setup
for which the NN-based equalizers are trained, and thus they are specified in Sec. V-A individually for
every setup.

B. Data Normalization
   Normalizing the input data of NNs is generally considered to be very important for training conver-
gence when optimizing their learnable parameters via backpropagation [45], [46]. While in many current
publications on NN-based data estimation in MIMO systems over uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channels
no normalization of the NN input data is applied (cf., e.g., [17]–[19]), we showed in [47] and [39] that
for a so-called UW-OFDM communication system a proper data normalization is of major importance
for the performance of NN-based equalizers (for a visualization of the influence of data normalization on
the performance of NN-based equalizers for UW-OFDM, we refer to [47]). With the same idea as for
UW-OFDM in mind, namely to apply a normalization scheme leading to variances of the elements of the
noise vector that are independent of the multipath channel, we implement a data normalization scheme for
SC-FDE systems. This data normalization scheme for SC-FDE is elucidated in [31], and thus we repeat
here only the result. To obtain channel-independent noise variances var(wi ), the system model (5) has to
be multiplied by K = κH   e −1/2 , where
                                            q
                                                e
                                         κ = tr{H}/tr{ e
                                                       HMM      e .
                                                              H H}                                   (29)
The normalization of the input data of the NN-based equalizers is implemented by multiplying both y
and He by K as part of pre-processing, and is neglected in the remainder of this paper for the sake of
readability.
                                                                                                        16



                                               V. R ESULTS
   In this section, we investigate the proposed versions of SICNN thoroughly by means of simulations
of data transmission in an indoor frequency selective environment. To demonstrate the wide applicability
the proposed NN-based approaches, we evaluate them for a number of different SC-FDE communication
system setups. We show simulation results for SC-FDE systems with both UW and CP guard inter-
vals. Besides simulations with a QPSK modulation alphabet, also results for a 16-QAM alphabet are
provided. Most of the simulations are conducted assuming perfect channel knowledge on receiver side.
The robustness of the proposed NN-based data estimators in case of imperfect channel knowledge, is
proven by simulating their performance for estimated channel impulse responses. Further, we highlight the
performance improvements of NN-based equalizers when being trained on a training set generated with our
proposed approach, presented in Sec. IV-A. We compare SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, and their corresponding
parameter-reduced versions SICNNv1Red and SICNNv2Red, with state-of-the-art model-based and NN-
based equalizers in terms of both their achieved BER performance over a specified SNR range and their
computational complexity. More specifically, for comparison with model-based equalizers, we use the
LMMSE estimator [35], the iterative DFE (implemented in the same way as described in [47] for UW-
OFDM systems), and the iterative SIC method, where the approximation (14) is employed. We compare
the proposed NNs with the state-of-the-art NN-based data estimators OAMP-Net2 [19] and DetNet [18],
whereby we do not use DetNet as proposed in [18] for MIMO systems, but a better performing version
that is adapted for SC-FDE systems [31]. Moreover, we show the BER performance and computational
complexity of KAFCNN from [31], which is an FCNN that is designed for equalization in SC-FDE
systems by using a layer conducting an inverse DFT as a last layer, i.e., the knowledge that the data
symbols being defined in time domain are to be estimated given a received vector in frequency domain
is incorporated.
   Moreover, for an SC-FDE system with a UW guard interval we present the influence of a limited training
set size on the BER performance of selected NN-based equalizers to investigate the “data hunger” of an
NN depending on its number of learnable parameters.
   Finally, we also present performance results for SICNNv2 being employed as an equalizer in com-
munication system utilizing the so-called UW-OFDM signaling scheme. With these results we want the
highlight the wide applicability and the versatility of the proposed NN-based equalizers.

A. Simulation Setup and Neural Network Training
   The shown simulation results are obtained by simulating data transmission without channel coding.
Apart from Sec. V-D, all simulation settings, results, interpretations, and conclusions in this work are
given for SC-FDE systems. The simulation setup and the results for the simulation of SICNNv2 as an
equalizer in a UW-OFDM system are detailed in Sec. V-D. For SC-FDE communications with a UW guard
interval, simulations are conducted with the SC-FDE system parameters Nd = 20, Ng = 12 (i.e., N = 32),
RRC roll-off factor α = 0.25, a baseband sampling time Ts = 52 ns. Further, unless noted otherwise, a
QPSK modulation alphabet is employed, and perfect channel knowledge is assumed on receiver side. The
parameters of the simulations of SC-FDE systems with a CP guard interval differ from those with a UW
guard interval by the data vector length Nd = 32, all other parameters are maintained.
   The achieved BER performances of the different equalizers are plotted in a specified Eb /N0 interval.
The presented BER performances for SC-FDE systems are averaged results over 7000 different multipath
channel realizations, which are modeled as described in [48] in form of tapped delay lines with uniformly
distributed phase, Rayleigh distributed magnitude, and an exponentially decaying power profile with a
root mean square delay spread of τRMS = 100 ns. The data transmission is conducted in form of data
bursts containing 1000 blocks of payload data per burst, where the channel is assumed to be stationary
for one burst and changes independently of its previous realizations for every burst.
   For training the NN-based equalizers, we generate training sets with the proposed approach described
in Sec. IV-A. The selected parameters of the training set generation method Nepd and Nburst , the training
                                                                                                                                                     17



                                                      TABLE I
              PARAMETERS OF THE TRAINING SET GENERATION APPROACH FOR DIFFERENT SC-FDE SYSTEM SETTINGS .

                                                                                                            Eb /N0 train.
                              SC-FDE parameters           Baseline equalizer       Nepd       Nburst
                                                                                                            range in dB
                          UW guard, QPSK                  LMMSE, eq. (6)               3           100            [2, 12.5]
                          CP guard, QPSK                  LMMSE, eq. (7)               2           100              [5, 18]
                          UW guard, 16-QAM                LMMSE, eq. (6)               3           100              [6, 19]
                          UW guard, QPSK,                 approx. LMMSE,
                                                                                       3           100              [3, 16]
                          channel est.                    eq. (7)


                                                           TABLE II
 H YPERPARAMETER SETTINGS OF THE PROPOSED NN EQUALIZERS . T HE HYPERPARAMETERS OF THE PARAMETER - REDUCED NN S
 SICNN V 1R ED AND SICNN V 2R ED DIFFER FROM THE HYPERPARAMETERS OF SICNN V 1 AND SICNN V 2 ONLY BY THE LEARNING
                                     RATE ηSICNN V 1R ED AND ηSICNN V 2R ED , RESPECTIVELY.


 SC-FDE
                                         SICNNv1 / SICNNv1Red                                                     SICNNv2 / SICNNv2Red
 parameters
                     ηSICNNv1      ηSICNNv1Red    Q         nL,C    nH,C       nL,pr       nH,pr       ηSICNNv2    ηSICNNv2Red     Q       nL   nH
                              −4           −5                                                               −4                −4
 UW guard, QPSK      6 · 10          3 · 10           7        3      70          2          10        5 · 10        1 · 10            7    4   200
 CP guard, QPSK      1 · 10−3        7 · 10−5         7        3     100          2          10        9 · 10−4      1 · 10−4          7    4   250
 UW guard,
                     9 · 10−4        4 · 10−5         7        3      70          3          20        1 · 10−3    2.5 · 10−4          7    4   230
 16-QAM




Eb /N0 range, as well as the employed baseline equalizer for selecting the data vectors for the training set
are summarized for all SC-FDE system setups in Tab. I. Unless stated otherwise, every training set consists
of data transmissions over 30000 different channels. For training of all NNs early stopping is used. That
is, the BER performance on a validation set is evaluated after every epoch, and the set of learnable NN
parameters achieving the best validation performance is chosen after training for a pre-defined maximum
number of epochs.
   The hyperparameters of the NN-based equalizers are found using the hyperparameter optimization
framework Optuna [49]. For SICNNv1, the best hyperparameter settings found are given in Tab. II, and
we train it for 25 epochs at most. For SICNNv1Red, the same hyperparameters as for SICNNv1 are used
apart from a learning rate ηSICNNv1Red . The hyperparameters of SICNNv2 are also given in Tab. II, and we
train it for a maximum of 25 epochs. The hyerparameters of SICNNv2Red differ from those of SICNNv2
only by ηSICNNv2Red . For DetNet, OAMP-Net2, and KAFCNN the best hyperparameter found are shown
in Tab. III. Moreover, DetNet and KAFCNN are trained for 60 epochs at most, and OAMP-Net2 for a
maximum of 15 epochs.

B. Bit Error Ratio Performance for SC-FDE
   1) Unique Word Guard Interval, QPSK: We start with investigations on an SC-FDE system with
UW guard interval and QPSK modulation alphabet. First, we investigate the influence of the number of
iterations Q of the model-based iterative SIC method as well as the number of stages Q of SICNNv1
on the achieved BER performance to highlight similarities and differences between the model-based and
the NN-based approach. As shown in Fig. 3, our simulation result validates the proof of the equivalence
of the bit error probabilities of the LMMSE hard decision estimates and the estimates of the iterative
SIC method after one iteration. Moreover, the BER performance of the iterative SIC method considerably
improves when conducting a second iteration (Q = 2), outperforming the DFE over a wide Eb /N0 range.
For Q ≥ 3, two interesting effects are visible. Firstly, the BER performance flattens out at higher Eb /N0
values. Secondly, although more iterations lead to an improvement of the BER performance at lower
                                                                                                                                         18



                                                          TABLE III
   H YPERPARAMETER SETTINGS OF THE STATE - OF - THE - ART NN EQUALIZERS USED FOR COMPARISON . S IMILAR TO THE ORIGINAL
PUBLICATION [18], FOR D ET N ET η DENOTES THE LEARNING RATE , L THE NUMBER OF LAYERS , dH THE NUMBER OF HIDDEN NEURONS
 IN THE SINGLE - HIDDEN - LAYER FCNN, dV THE DIMENSION OF THE AUXILIARY VARIABLE PASSING UNCONSTRAINED INFORMATION
 THOURGH THE NETWORK , AND β THE RESIDUAL WEIGHTING FACTOR . F OR OAMP-N ET 2 [19], η IS THE LEARNING RATE , AND T IS
 THE NUMBER OF LAYERS . F OR KAFCNN [31], η IS THE LEARNING RATE , L THE NUMBER OF LAYERS , dH THE NUMBER OF NEURONS
                                 PER HIDDEN LAYER , AND β THE RESIDUAL WEIGHTING FACTOR .


 SC-FDE
                                             DetNet                                 OAMP-Net2                         KAFCNN
 parameters
                         η          L           dh        dv           β             η         T             η        L        nh    β
                               −4                                                        −3                      −3
 UW guard, QPSK       6 · 10            15          200       20        0.5       1 · 10            8    1 · 10           12   250   0.8
 CP guard, QPSK       6 · 10−4          15          250       30        0.5       1 · 10−3         10    1 · 10−3         12   300   0.8
 UW guard,
                      6 · 10−4          15          220       25        0.5       1 · 10−3          8    1 · 10−3         12   280   0.8
 16-QAM



                                                          SICNNv1 Q = 2              SICNNv1 Q = 3
                                                          SICNNv1 Q = 7              iter. SIC Q = 1
                                                          iter. SIC Q = 2            iter. SIC Q = 3
                                                          iter. SIC Q = 6            DFE
                                                          LMMSE
                                             10−1



                                             10−2



                                             10−3
                                     BER




                                             10−4



                                             10−5



                                             10−6
                                                    2     4        6          8          10   12        14
                                                                       Eb /N0 (dB)

Fig. 3. BER performance of the iterative SIC method and SICNNv1 for different numbers of iterations / stages Q (SC-FDE with UW guard,
QPSK).


Eb /N0 values (which is, however, rather small), at higher Eb /N0 values the performance even slightly
degrades the more iterations are conducted, which can be explained by the error caused by approximating
                         (q)
the covariance matrix Cvv,k . For SICNNv1, more stages than iterations of the model-based method are
required to obtain good BER performance, however, for Q = 7 stages, the iterative SIC method is
considerably outperformed by SICNNv1.
  Next, we compare the proposed NN-based data estimators SICNNv1, SICNNv2, SICNNv1Red and
SICNNv2Red with the aforementioned state-of-the-art model-based and NN-based equalizers in terms
of achieved BER performance. Their training and hyperparameter optimization is conducted with the
same training set as used for the proposed NN-based equalizers. As shown in Fig. 4, SICNNv1 is
the best performing equalizer for a wide Eb /N0 range, followed by SICNNv2 and OAMP-Net2. The
parameter-reduced variant SICNNv1Red exhibits approximately the same performance as DetNet. All
                                                                                                                         19



                                                         DFE                   LMMSE
                                                         iter. SIC Q = 3       OAMP-Net2
                                                         DetNet                KAFCNN
                                                         SICNNv1               SICNNv1Red
                                                         SICNNv2               SICNNv2Red
                                         10−1



                                         10−2



                                         10−3
                                   BER

                                         10−4



                                         10−5



                                         10−6
                                                2    4        6        8        10    12    14
                                                                  Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 4. BER performance of NN-based and model-based equalizers for SC-FDE with a UW guard interval and QPSK alphabet.


                                         10−1



                                         10−2



                                         10−3
                                   BER




                                                    DFE
                                         10−4       LMMSE
                                                    SICNNv1
                                                    SICNNv2
                                                    DetNet
                                         10−5
                                                    SICNNv1 (rand. tr. data)
                                                    SICNNv2 (rand. tr. data)
                                                    DetNet (rand. tr. data)
                                         10−6
                                                2    4        6        8        10    12    14
                                                                  Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 5. BER performance comparison of NN-based equalizers for SC-FDE with a UW guard interval and QPSK alphabet, when being
trained with randomly generated training data (rand. tr. data), or on a training set generated by the proposed approach.


of the aforementioned NN-based equalizers can outperform or perform similarly as the model-based
equalizers considered for comparison. SICNNv2Red, in turn, is the worst performing among the proposed
NN-based equalizers, but still has a far better BER performance than KAFCNN. From this simulation result
we can conclude that using the same sub-NNs in all stages of the proposed NN-based equalizers leads to
a reduction of the number of learnable parameters at the cost of a performance decrease. However, since
fewer parameters have to be optimized, the reduction of learnable parameters decreases the computational
effort for training the NNs.
   For an SC-FDE system with a UW guard interval and QPSK modulation alphabet, we also show
                                                                                                                          20



                                         10−1



                                         10−2



                                         10−3       DFE
                                                    LMMSE




                                   BER
                                                    iter. SIC Q = 3
                                         10−4       OAMP-Net2
                                                    DetNet
                                                    KAFCNN
                                                    SICNNv1
                                         10−5
                                                    SICNNv1Red
                                                    SICNNv2
                                                    SICNNv2Red
                                         10−6
                                                6   8      10     12   14     16   18   20
                                                                Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 6. BER performance of NN-based and model-based equalizers for SC-FDE with a UW guard interval and 16-QAM alphabet.


the influence of our proposed approach for training set generation, described in Sec. IV-A, on the
BER performance of trained NN-based equalizers. Exemplary for SICNNv1, SICNNv2, and DetNet,
we compare their performance when being trained on a dataset generated with our approach with the
case that they are trained with randomly generated training data. For the randomly generated training
data, the Eb /N0 values of the sample transmissions contained in the training set are chosen randomly
(with uniform distribution on the linear Eb /N0 scale) in the range [3 dB, 14 dB], which is a state-of-the-art
approach for the training of NN-based equalizers. As shown in Fig. 5, particularly at high Eb /N0 values,
the performance of the aforementioned NN-based equalizers can be significantly improved by training
them on a training set generated by our proposed method. As elucidated in Sec. IV-A, we assume that the
main reason for this performance improvement is, that at high SNRs distinctly more training samples lying
close to the decision boundaries of the optimal equalizer are available, allowing the NNs to approximate
the optimal decision boundaries. For all following results, the NNs are trained with datasets that are
generated with our proposed method.
   2) Unique Word Guard Interval, 16-QAM: To show that the proposed NN-based equalizers can also
cope with higher order modulation alphabets, we present BER performance results for an SC-FDE
system with a UW guard interval and 16-QAM modulation alphabet. As shown in Fig. 6, SICNNv1
is also the best performing among all considered equalizers for this system setup. Similar as for a
QPSK modulation alphabet, the best performing equalizer behind SICNNv1 are SICNNv2 and OAMP-
Net, outperforming the model-based DFE in lower Eb /N0 regions and performing similarly in higher
Eb /N0 regions. SICNNv1Red, SICNNv2Red, DetNet, and KAFCNN, in turn, exhibit a significantly worse
performance, where KAFCNN is the worst performing among all considered NN-based equalizers.
   3) Imperfect Channel Knowledge: We investigate the influence of imperfect channel knowledge on the
performance of NN-based and model-based equalizers. To this end, the channel, which is assumed to be
stationary for one transmitted data burst, is estimated as described in [50] using a known preamble. This
preamble is transmitted prior to the data burst and contains two identical pilot vectors xp . Based on the
two corresponding received pilot vectors yp , the channel frequency response is estimated with the best
linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) [40]. For further details on the estimation of the channel frequency
response, we refer to [50].
   For this evaluation, the NN-based equalizers are trained in the same manner as for perfect channel
knowledge, however, as an input a channel matrix is employed which is computed using the estimated
channel frequency response. As shown in Fig. 7 for SICNNv1, SICNNv2, and OAMP-Net2, an imperfect
                                                                                                                                21



                                          10−1



                                          10−2



                                          10−3       DFE, true ch.
                                                     DFE, ch. est.




                                    BER
                                                     LMMSE, true ch.
                                          10−4       LMMSE, ch. est.
                                                     OAMP-Net2, true ch.
                                                     OAMP-Net2, ch. est
                                                     SICNNv1, true ch.
                                          10−5
                                                     SICNNv1, ch.est
                                                     SICNNv2, true ch.
                                                     SICNNv2, ch. est
                                          10−6
                                                 2    4       6        8        10   12    14
                                                                  Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 7. BER performance of NN-based and model-based equalizers for SC-FDE with a UW guard interval, QPSK alphabet, and with perfect
and imperfect channel knowledge.


channel knowledge has a similar influence on the BER performance as for model-based equalizers,
demonstrating their robustness in terms of imperfect channel knowledge at the receiver.
   4) Cyclic Prefix Guard Interval, QPSK: For all the previously shown results we have employed a UW
as a guard interval. In this section, we investigate the influence of using a CP as a guard interval on the
performance of the regarded NN-based and model-based equalizers. As presented in Fig. 8, SICNNv1 is
also the best performing equalizer for this system setup, where its performance is very similar to that
of OAMP-Net2. SICNNv2 and SICNNv1Red exhibit a very similar BER performance and can clearly
outperform DetNet, which achieves similar BER results as SICNNv2Red. The worst performing NN-based
equalizer is KAFCNN, still outperforming the model-based DFE. The LMMSE equalizer performs worst,
however, as mentioned in Sec. II-A, stands out due to its very low complexity for SC-FDE communications
with CP guard intervals.

C. Influence of a Reduced Training Set Size
   In this section, we investigate the influence of a limited training set size on the BER performance of
selected NN-based data estimators. That is, while for the BER performance results shown in Sec. V-B the
NN-based equalizers are trained utilizing sample data transmissions over 30 000 different multipath chan-
nels, the regarded NNs are trained with training sets consisting of 10 000 or 3 000 channels. We evaluate
the influence of a reduced training set size on the BER performance of selected NN-based equalizers for
an SC-FDE system with UW-guard interval and QPSK modulation alphabet. The hyperparameters of the
NN-based equalizers are the same as stated in Sec. V-A, apart from the number of training epochs which
is adapted appropriately such that the number of update steps of the learnable NN parameters remains
the same for all training set sizes.
   We regard SICNNv1, its parameter-reduced variant SICNNv1Red, the OAMP-Net2, and the KAFCNN
for performance comparison, whereby these NNs have for the chosen hyperparameter settings 135 590,
19 370, 32, and 746 628 learnable parameters, respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, the performance of
SICNNv1 and SICNNv1red slightly degrades in case of a reduced training set size of 10 000 or 3 000
channels. The BER performance of OAMP-Net2 barely changes when reducing the training set size,
while the performance of KAFCNN decreases most and is even worse than that of the LMMSE estimator
when being trained with 3 000 different channels. That is, the fewer learnable parameters an NN contains,
                                                                                                                        22



                                                             DFE                      LMMSE
                                                             iter. SIC Q = 3          OAMP-Net2
                                                             DetNet                   KAFCNN
                                                             SICNNv1                  SICNNv1Red
                                                             SICNNv2                  SICNNv2Red
                                          10−1



                                          10−2



                                          10−3
                                    BER

                                          10−4



                                          10−5



                                          10−6
                                                   4   6         8      10      12         14        16     18
                                                                      Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 8. BER performance of NN-based and model-based equalizers for SC-FDE with a CP guard interval and QPSK alphabet.

                                            DFE                       LMMSE                      OAMP-Net2
                                            KAFCNN                    SICNNv1                    SICNNv1Red
                                            train set size 30k        train set size 10k         train set size 3k
                                        10−1



                                        10−2



                                        10−3
                                  BER




                                        10−4



                                        10−5



                                        10−6
                                               2       4         6        8          10         12        14
                                                                     Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 9. BER performance comparison for different training set sizes (SC-FDE with UW guard, QPSK alphabet).


the less it suffers from a limited training set size. This result emphasizes the importance of parameter
reduction, e.g., by incorporating model knowledge into the layer architecture of an NN.

D. Bit Error Ratio Performance of SICNNv2 for UW-OFDM
   As mentioned in Sec. III-B, the layer architecture of SICNNv2 is inferred by deep unfolding iterative
SIC, but no properties of any specific communication system are exploited. Hence, we expect SICNNv2
to be universally applicable for any communication system with system models similar to the system
                                                                                                          23



                                                   LMMSE                      Opt. BER performance
                                                   RE-MIMO                    DetNet w/ precond.
                                                   DetNet w/o precond.        OAMP-Net2
                                                   SICNNv2
                                        10−2




                                        10−3




                                  BER   10−4




                                        10−5




                                        10−6
                                               8         10              12         14          16
                                                                Eb /N0 (dB)
Fig. 10. BER performance comparison for UW-OFDM (system I from [39]).


model (5) of SC-FDE systems. To demonstrate this claim, we apply SICNNv2 as an equalizer in a UW-
OFDM system [51]–[53]. The data transmission in UW-OFDM systems can be modeled as [39], [51],
[52]
                                                           e d+w,
                                                       y = |{z}
                                                           HG                                          (30)
                                                                H

where d ∈ S is the transmitted data vector of length Nd to be estimated, y ∈ CNd +Nu the received vector
              Nd
                                                                                    e ∈ C(Nd +Nu )×(Nd +Nu )
at the input of the equalizer, and Nu the length of the UW guard interval. Further, H
denotes a diagonal matrix containing the sampled channel frequency response of the channel (excluding
at positions of OFDM zero-subcarriers) on the main diagonal, G ∈ C(Nd +Nu )×Nd the so-called generator
matrix, which is a full, rectangular matrix, and w ∼ N C(0, (Nd + Nu )σn2 I), where σn2 is the variance of
AWGN in time domain. For further details on UW-OFDM we refer to [51], [52]. That is, the models
of UW-OFDM and SC-FDE systems are very similar, allowing to employ SICNNv2 unaltered for UW-
OFDM, apart from the used data normalization, which is described in [39]. We train (exactly in the
same manner as all other state-of-the-art NNs used for comparison) and evaluate SICNNv2 for a UW-
OFDM system referred to as system I in [39], where Nd = 8, Nu = 4, and the modulation alphabet is
QPSK. The best hyperparameter combination found is a learning rate η = 5 · 10−4 , Q = 6 stages, nL = 2
hidden layers of the sub-NNs, and nH = 200 neurons per hidden layer of the sub-NNs. SICNNv2 is
compared to the state-of-the-art NN-based equalizers OAMP-Net2 [19], RE-MIMO [17], DetNet [18],
and an improved version of DetNet, that employs a preconditioner in its layers [39]. Due to the small
dimension of system I, even the optimal BER performance can be computed by applying the bit-wise
MAP estimator. For all further details on the simulation setup, on the NNs used for comparison, or their
training, we refer to [39]. As shown in Fig. 10, SICNNv2 can outperform the NN-based equalizers OAMP-
Net2, DetNet in its original form [18], and performs similar as RE-MIMO. Further, its performance is
very close to that of the improved version of DetNet and to the optimal BER performance achieved by
the bit-wise MAP estimator. This result demonstrates the applicability of the proposed SICNN idea for
different communication systems.
                                                                                                                   24



E. Computational Complexity
   Besides the BER performance of the regarded equalizers, also their computational complexity is an
important aspect. We compare the inference complexity of the model-based and the NN-based equalizers
regarded in this work in terms of the number of real-valued multiplications required for the equalization of a
received vector, where four real-valued multiplications and two real-valued multiplications are accounted
for a product of two complex values and a real and a complex value, respectively, and divisions are
counted as multiplications. Since NN training can be carried out offline, we do not regard their training
complexity. We assume that both H     e and H = HM e     are already available and thus the complexity of
computing H is not considered for the following complexity analysis. Unless stated otherwise, we derive
the computational complexities for a general matrix M and a length N ′ of the received vector, where, as
described in Sec. II-A3, both have to be replaced by the appropriate quantities Muw and N , or FNd and
Nd , when using a UW or a CP as a guard interval, respectively.
   We start by investigating the complexity of the proposed SICNNv1. Let us first consider the operations
conducted in a single stage q for estimating the data symbol dk . The computation of dˆk,Re , dˆk,Im , ek ,
                                                                                              (q)   (q)    (q)

  (q)    (q)
yic,k , ak , takes
                            |S′ | + |S′ | + 4|S′ | + 2 + 4N ′ (Nd − 1) + 2N ′ (Nd − 1)
                           |{z} |{z} | {z } |                  {z    } |       {z    }
                              (q)      (q)        (q)                     (q)               (q)
                            dˆk,Re   dˆk,Im       ek                    yic,k              ak

real-valued multiplications, and the inference of FCNN 1 has a complexity of
                          2(3N ′ + 1) +(3N ′ + 1)nH,C + (nL,C − 1)n2H,C + nH,C N ′ .
                          | {z }
                            batch norm.
                                                                                                   (q)−1   (q)
Squaring the outputs of FCNN 1 takes another N ′ multiplications. For the terms hH      k Ĉvv,k yic,k and
     (q)−1          (q)−1                                     (q)
hH              H
 k Ĉvv,k hk , hk Ĉvv,k is computed first and multiplied by yic,k and hk subsequently, leading for these
two terms in total to a complexity of
                                                  2N ′ + |{z}
                                                  |{z}   4N ′ + |{z}
                                                                4N ′ .
                                                       (q)−1     (q)
                                              hH
                                               k Ĉvv,k
                                                               ·yic,k           ·hk

                                                                    (q)
The inference of FCNN 2 and the normalization of yic,k and hk require another
                                     6 + 3nH,pr + (nL,pr − 1)n2H,pr + 2nH,pr |S′ |
and 8N ′ + 1 multiplications, respectively. Consequently, for estimating a single data symbol in a stage,
in total
                            MSICNNv1,kq = n2H,pr (nL,pr − 1) + nH,pr (2|S′ | + 3)
                                            + n2H,C (nL,C − 1) + nH,C (4N ′ + 1)                     (31)
                                                    ′      ′      ′
                                            + 19N + 6|S | + 6N Nd + 11
For data normalization, another
                                                         N ′ + |{z}
                                          4Nd N ′ + 1 + |{z}   2N ′ + |{z}
                                                                       N′
                                          | {z }
                                              κ                κH
                                                                e          Ky         KH
                                                                                       e

real-valued multiplications are required, leading to a total complexity of SICNNv1
                              MSICNNv1 = QNd MSICNNv1,kq + 4Nd N ′ + 4N ′ + 1 ,                                  (32)
with MSICNNv1,kq as specified in (31).
  For SICNNv2, the approach for deriving its complexity is similar. As already stated for SICNNv1,
the total complexity for computing dˆk,Re , dˆk,Im , ek,Re , ek,Im , and yic,k is given by 6|S′ | + 4N ′ (Nd − 1).
                                       (q)    (q)     (q)     (q)         (q)
                                                                                                                 25


                                      (q)                                                          (q)   (q)
For computing the scaling factor ρk , scaling the quantities contained in zk (and squaring ρk ), and the
inference of the FCNN, another
                                                j n k
                            ′      ′               L
                         4N   + 4N
                        |{z} | {z }  + 4 +  1 +        (6N ′ + 2) +(4N ′ + 3)nH
                                                  3    | {z }
                           (q)       scaling
                          ρk                                          batch norm.

                               + (nL − 1)n2H + 2nH |S′ |
multiplications are required. Consequently, the complexity of SICNNv2 follows to
                            MSICNNv2 = QNd MSICNNv2,kq + 4Nd N ′ + 4N ′ + 1 ,                                  (33)
with
                                            jn k
                                               L
                        MSICNNv2,kq =            (6N ′ + 2) + n2H (nL − 1) + 4N ′ Nd
                                              3                                                                (34)
                                            + 10N ′ + nH (4N ′ + 2|S′ | + 3) + 6|S′ | + 6 .
   The complexity of DetNet can be derived similarly as for UW-OFDM, which has been conducted
in [39]. For all operations conducted for SC-FDE specific pre-processing and for the inference of DetNet,
we refer to [31]. Here, we only state the final result for the inference complexity of DetNet. In the qth
DetNet layer inference of a single hidden layer FCNN, one-hot demapping of the data vector estimate in
the qth layer, and applying weighted residual connections are conducted, which entails
                               MDetNet,q = 4Nd2 + 6Nd + 2dh (Nd (|S′ | + 1) + dv )
                                                                                                               (35)
                                           + 2Nd |S′ | + dv
real-valued multiplications, where dh is the number of neurons in the hidden layer of the FCNN, and dv
is the dimension of an auxiliary variable passing unconstrained information from DetNet layer to DetNet
layer [18], [31], [39]. In total, the inference complexity of DetNet is
                           MDetNet = LMDetNet,q − 2Nd |S′ | + 4Nd N ′ + 4N ′ + 1
                                                              |       {z       }
                                                                         data normalization
                                                       ′       2 ′     ′                                       (36)
                                            + 6Nd N        + 4Nd N + 2N ,
                                              |               {z             }
                                                     input pre-processing

where the subtracted term accounts for no one-hot demapping in the last DetNet layer, L is the number of
DetNet layers, and for the input pre-processing the quantities MH H    e 1/2 M and MH H
                                                                                      e −1/2 y are computed
(cf. [31]).
   The KAFCNN [31] with weighted residual connections and a multiplication by a partial inverse DFT
matrix in the last layer requires
                                                                                  
                         MKAFCNN = 3N ′ + (nL − 1)nH + 2N ′ |S′ | + (nL − 2) nH
                                    + 4N ′ Nd |S′ | + 2Nd |S′ | + 4Nd N ′ + 4N ′ + 1                   (37)
                                      |          {z         } |           {z       }
                                               part. IDFT + symb. scaling           data normalization

  The OAMP-Net2 layer structure [19] also stems from unfolding an iterative model-based algorithm, such
that determining its inference complexity is conducted in a similar fashion as for DetNet or SICNNv1/SICNNv2.
For the matrix inverse that has to be computed in every layer of OAMP-Net2, we assume that a Cholesky
                                                                                                         26



decomposition [54] is employed for accomplishing this task. The computational complexity of OAMP-
Net2 can thus be specified as (using the notation from [19])
                                   
                       MONet2 = T 8Nd N ′ + 2Nd + 4Nd2 (2N ′ + 1) + 8Nd N ′ + 5
                                     |    {z      } |           {z            }
                                             rt                              τt2
                               14 ′ 3                                      1
                           +      N + 8N ′ 2 (2Nd + 1) + 8Nd (N ′ + |S′ | + ) + 2
                               |3                     {z                   2    }                     (38)
                                                       x̂d,t+1
                                                   
                           + 2Nd (2N ′ + 1) + 1 + 4Nd N ′ + 4N ′ + 1
                             |      {z        }   |       {z       }
                                      vt2                 data normalization

   Let us now consider the complexity of the model-based equalizers. For the LMMSE estimator, one
has to distinguish between UW and CP guard intervals. We start by regarding its complexity in case of
a UW guard interval. Here, we first regard its complexity for determining the LMMSE estimator matrix
ELMMSE , which is independent of the received vector y and thus has to be computed only once per data
burst (the channel is assumed to be stationary for the whole data burst). By assuming that the inverse
in (6) is computed utilizing a Cholesky decomposition [54],
                                                     14
                     MLMMSE,burst = 4Nd2 (Nd + Ng ) + Nd3 + 4Nd2 + 4Nd2 (Nd + Ng )
                                    |      {z    } |3 {z      } |         {z    }
                                            MH H        inverse (Cholesky)         ·MH

                                     38 3
                                  =    N + 8Nd2 Ng + 4Nd2                                         (39)
                                      3 d
real-valued multiplications are to be carried out for computing ELMMSE . Given ELMMSE , the complexity
of equalizing one received vector is
                                       MLMMSE,eq = 4Nd (Nd + Ng ) .                                   (40)
   In case of a CP guard interval, equalization becomes for the LMMSE estimator far less complex. As
given in (7), the matrix for which an inverse has to be computed is a diagonal matrix. Hence, obtaining
the estimator matrix ELMMSE,dg requires 4Nd real-valued multiplications, which is already the number of
multiplications that have to be carried out per burst
                                             MLMMSE,burst = 4Nd .                                     (41)
For equalization of a single received data vector, a multiplication with the diagonal estimator matrix
ELMMSE,dg is required, followed by conducting an inverse DFT, leading to a complexity of
                                    MLMMSE,eq = 4Nd + 2Nd log2 (Nd ) ,                                (42)
                                                      |    {z     }
                                                                 IDFT

real-valued multiplications.
   For the DFE, using a CP guard interval does not reduce the complexity as for the LMMSE, since
in every iteration the LMMSE error variances (which are the diagonal elements of the LMMSE error
covariance matrix) have to be computed. We distinguish between operations to be carried out only once
every data burst and those to be accomplished for every received vector. For a derivation of the complexity
of the DFE we refer to [39], where an in-depth complexity analysis of the DFE for a similar system,
namely a UW-OFDM system is conducted. Here, we only state the final results. The number of real-valued
multiplications to be conducted once per data burst is
                              7     11    19               2               14
                  MDFE,burst = Nd4 + Nd3 + Nd2 + 6Nd2 N ′ + Nd + 2Nd N ′ −    ,                       (43)
                              6      3     6               3                3
                                                                                                                                        27



                                                       TABLE IV
  N UMBER OF REQUIRED REAL - VALUED MULTIPLICATIONS ( ROUNDED TO HUNDREDS ) OF EVALUATED EQUALIZERS FOR DIFFERENT
                                               SC-FDE SYSTEM SETUPS .

                                                                         Nr. multiplications for different setups
     Equalizer
                                                              UW guard, QPSK       UW guard, 16-QAM               CP guard, QPSK
     SICNNv1 / SICNNv1Red              MSICNNv1                     3 288 600                  3 409 300                8 929 500
     SICNNv2 / SICNNv2Red              MSICNNv2                     6 836 900                 31 552 200               50 600 900
     DetNet                            MDetNet                        565 100                    911 400                1 153 200
     KAFCNN                            MKAFCNN                        753 900                    976 900                1 072 700
     OAMP-Net2                         MONet2                       4 892 300                  4 894 800                9 815 100
                                       MLMMSE,burst                   141 300                    141 300                      100
     LMMSE
                                       MLMMSE,eq                        2 600                      2 600                      400
                                       MDFE,burst                     295 400                    295 400                1 545 400
     DFE
                                       MDFE,eq                          5 100                      5 100                    8 200
     Iterative SIC                     MitSIC                      14 440 800                 14 441 500               27 897 500


while the inference complexity per received vector is given by
                                                        MDFE,eq = 8Nd N ′ .                                                         (44)
   For the iterative SIC method, the same steps have to be conducted Q times, where – as for the
LMMSE estimator – a Cholesky decomposition is utilized for inverting the (approximated) covariance
matrices Cvv,k in every iteration. We assume that the estimated data symbols dˆk
            (q)                                                                 (q−1)
                                                                                      are multiplied by the
corresponding column of H only once per iteration, being available for interference cancellation required
for estimating any data symbol dk . Hence, the computational complexity of the iterative SIC method with
Q iterations is
                                                            14                                         
  MitSIC = QNd 6|S′ | + 2 + (Nd − 1)(2N ′ + 4N ′ 2 ) + 4N ′ + N ′ 3 + 4N ′ 2 + 4N ′ 2 + 8N ′ + 4 + 4N ′
                   | {z } |               {z             } |3      {z      } |         {z      } |{z}
                    (q) (q)               (q)
                       dˆk ,ek                        Cvv,k                         Cholesky                 (q)                (q−1)
                                                                                                            fk (.)         hk dˆk
                      14                                                                      
           = QNd            N ′ 3 + 4N ′ 2 Nd + 4N ′ 2 + 2N ′ Nd + 14N ′ + 6|S′ | + 6             (45)
                 3
  The numerical results of the complexities of the equalizers for the SC-FDE system setup specified in
Sec. V-A are given in Tab. IV. For all system setups considered, DetNet and KAFCNN are the lowest
complex NN-based equalizers. The inference complexity of SICNNv1 is distinctly lower than that of
SICNNv2 and OAMP-Net2, and also than the model-based iterative SIC method it is deduced from.
However, the LMMSE estimator and the DFE exhibit by far the lowest complexity.

                                              VI. C ONCLUSION
   In this work, we proposed novel NN-based equalizers, called SICNNv1 and SICNNv2, inspired by a
model-based soft interference cancellation scheme. SICNNv1 is tailored for an SC-FDE communication
system, while SICNNv2 is also applicable for other communication systems with block-based data trans-
mission. In addition, we presented a novel approach for generating training sets for NN-based equalizers,
which considerably helps to improve their performance at high SNRs. We evaluated the proposed NN-
based equalizers for a number of different SC-FDE system setups, and investigated their robustness with
respect to imperfect channel knowledge at the receiver. In particular SICNNv1 exhibits a superior BER
performance over all regarded state-of-the-art model-based and NN-based equalization approaches for all
SC-FDE system setups considered. To highlight the universal applicability of SICNNv2, we exemplarily
presented its state-of-the-art performance for a UW-OFDM system. Further, we investigated the influence
of the size of the dataset used to train the NN-based equalizers, and we presented an in-depth complexity
analysis.
                                                                                                                          28



                                                 A PPENDIX A
                   N OISE S TATISTICS IN A S OFT I NTERFERENCE C ANCELLATION S TEP
  Let us consider the system model (11) for estimating the kth data symbol dk , k ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1}, for
any but the first iteration (q = 0), i.e., 0 < q < Q,
                                                                            (q)
                                                                           rk
                                                                       z }| {
                                        (q)            ˆ (q−1) = h d − H̄ δ̄ (q−1) +w ,
                                       yic,k = y − H̄k d̄                                                            (46)
                                                                  k k
                                                          k
                                                                      | k {zk
                                                                                    }
                                                                                (q)
                                                                            vk

                                                                                                                    (q)
which we repeat here for readability. Following central limit theorem arguments, the total noise vk is
                                                                            (q)             (q)    (q)           (q)
assumed to feature a multivariate Gaussian distribution, i.e., p(vk ) = CN µv,k , Cvv,k , where µv,k and
   (q)                                                                       (q−1)                           (q)
Cvv,k are to be specified. We start by computing the statistics of δ̄k             , followed by those of rk to obtain
                               (q)
finally the distribution of vk . It is important to note, that for computing noise statistics in iteration q, the
estimation errors from the previous iteration (q−1) have to be specified, whereby the interference canceled
           (q−1)                                                           (q)   (q)         (q−1)
vectors yic,k are fixed and available, i.e., the PDFs/PMFs of vk , rk , and δ̄k                    are not unconditional,
                                       (q−1)
but are conditioned on a given yic,k .
                                                   = dˆk
                                           (q−1)        (q−1)                  (q−1)
    A data symbol estimation error δk                         − dk , where yic,k is given, can only attain a finite
number of different values (as many    (q−1)as the  cardinality |S| of the symbol alphabet), and thus its statistics
                                                (q−1) 
is described by a PMF pd |y(q) δk              yic,k . In order to compute the statistics of an estimation error
                               k ic,k

        = dˆk
  (q−1)     (q−1)
δk                − dk , we start by reconsidering the MMSE estimate of the preceding iteration
                                                         (q−1) 
                                                                    X                  (q−1) 
                           dˆk
                             (q−1)
                                    = Ed |y(q−1) dk yic,k         =    s′ p dk = s′ yic,k .                          (47)
                                              k   ic,k
                                                                   s′ ∈S

Since
                                                             ˆ (q−2) ,
                                                          (q−1)
                                                   = y − H̄k d̄
                                                         yic,k                                             (48)
                                                                k
                            (q−1)          (q−1)             ˆ (q−2) , where we consider d̄
                                                                                                ˆ (q−2) to be a
we can reformulate p dk yic,k        as p dk yic,k    = p dk y, d̄  k                             k
fixed vector in iteration (q − 1), which does not feature a statistical distribution. It can be observed from
the system model for iteration step (q − 1)
                                       (q−1)
                                     yic,k = y − H̄k d̄ˆ (q−2) = h d − H̄ δ̄ (q−2) + w                               (49)
                                                         k           k k       k k
                            ˆ (q−2)  does not depend on the estimate dˆ(q−2) for a given y and d̄      ˆ (q−2) . Hence,
that the PMF p dk y, d̄        k                                                k                          k
                                                           ˆ (q−2)  without altering the PMF, i.e., pd y, d̄ˆ (q−2)  =
dˆk
  (q−2)
        can be included in the condition of p dk y, d̄        k                                          k        k
        ˆ (q−2) , dˆ(q−2)  = pd y, d̂(q−2) . Consequently, the MMSE estimate dˆ(q−1) and its corresponding
p dk y, d̄ k         k               k                                                        k
conditional MSE can be rewritten as
                                                         (q−1)                                
                               dˆk
                                 (q−1)
                                        = Ed |y(q−1) dk yic,k     = Edk |y,d̂(q−2) dk y, d̂(q−2)                     (50)
                                              k   ic,k

and
                                          (q−1) 2 (q−1)                         (q−1) 2           
                       = Ed |y(q−1) dk − dˆk               = Edk |y,d̂(q−2) dk − dˆk
               (q−1)
              ek                                  yic,k                                    y, d̂(q−2) ,              (51)
                            k   ic,k

respectively. Hence, the conditional PMF of an estimation error δk can be written as
                                     (q−1) (q−1)                   (q−1)           
                          pd |y(q−1) δk    yic,k    = pdk |y,d̂(q−2) δk     y, d̂(q−2) ,
                                  k    ic,k
                                           (q−1)           
and the PMF of δ̄ (q−2) as pd̄k |y,d̂(q−2) δ̄k    y, d̂(q−2) .
                                                                                                                                     29


                                                                                                           (q)
  Following central limit theorem arguments, we assume the distribution of rk                                    to be multivariate
                       (q)
Gaussian. The mean of rk follows to
                             (q)                       ˆ (q−1) − d̄  y, d̂(q−2) 
                            µr,k = Ed̄k |y,d̂(q−2) H̄k d̄ k         k
                                         ˆ (q−1) − d̄       
                                                    ˆ (q−1) = 0 .
                                 = H̄ d̄         k     k            k                                                             (52)
Its covariance matrix, in turn, is given by
                             (q)            (q) (q) H 
                           Crr,k = Er(q) rk rk
                                       k
                                                        (q−1) (q−1) H           
                                 = H̄k Ed̄k |y,d̂(q−2) δ̄k    δ̄k      y, d̂(q−2) H̄H
                                                                                    k .                                           (53)
                                         |                   {z                  }
                                                                        e (q−1)
                                                                        E k


For computing an element in the mth row and the nth column of E       e              (q−1)
                                                                           , m, n ∈ {0, ..., Nd −2}, let us first
                                                                        k
consider
 (q−1)  to which data symbol    di and dj in the data vector d, i, j ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1}, the matrix element
  e
 Ek
                              (q−1)
             belongs. Since δ̄k     contains the deviations of the data symbol estimates to the corresponding
         mn
true data symbols for all but the kth data symbols in the data vector, the index mapping follows to
                                 (                               (
                                    m       m<k                     n       n<k
                            i=                        and j =                      .
                                    m+1 m≥k                         n+1 n≥k

An off-diagonal element of E   e (q−1) can be written as
                                 k
        (q−1)                        (q−1) (q−1) ∗                    
         e
         E         = E          (q−2)  δ         δ          y,  d̂ (q−2)
           k    mn     d̄k |y,d̂         i         j
                                         ∗                                           (q−1) ∗             
                   = Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di dj |y, d̂(q−2) − Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di dˆj           |y, d̂(q−2)
                                             (q−1) ∗                                     (q−1) (q−1) ∗                
                     − Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) dˆi         dj |y, d̂(q−2) + Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) dˆi     dˆj        |y, d̂(q−2)
                                                                                               (q−1) ∗
                   = Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di d∗j |y, d̂(q−2) − Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di |y, d̂(q−2) dˆj
                                                                          (q−1) ˆ(q−1) ∗
                     − dˆi        Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) d∗j |y, d̂(q−2) + dˆi
                          (q−1)
                                                                                  dj
                                         ∗                         (q−1) ˆ(q−1) ∗
                   = Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di dj |y, d̂(q−2) − dˆi            dj       ,
                          e (q−1) has the value
and a diagonal element of E k
                           (q−1)                         (q−1) (q−1) ∗              
                           e
                           E           =  E         (q−2)  δ     δ        y,  d̂ (q−2)
                              k    mm      d̄k |y,d̂        i      i
                                                         (q−1) (q−1) ∗              
                                       = Edi |y,d̂(q−2) δi       δi       y, d̂(q−2)
                                                        (q−1)
                                                     = ei       .
                                               (q)
  With the above results at hand, vk can be specified to be a zero mean Gaussian distributed vector
with a covariance matrix
     (q)            (q) (q) H 
   Cvv,k = Ev(q) vk vk
               k
                      (q) (q) H         (q)                (q) H          
         = Er(q) ,w rk rk          − rk wH − wrk                   + wwH
               k
                                                                                                        
              (q)
         = Crr,k − H̄k E                       δ̄ (q−1) wH − E                          wδ̄ (q−1) H H̄H + Cww
                              d̄k |y,d̂(q−2) ,w k                        d̄k |y,d̂(q−2) ,w          k          k
                                                                                                          (q−1) H  H
         = H̄k E e (q−1) H̄H − H̄k E                 (q−2) ,w δ̄k
                                                                  (q−1) H
                                                                       w      −  E             (q−2) ,w w δ̄k
                                                                                                                                  e,
                                                                                                                      H̄k + N σn2 H
                   k       k              ( k
                                           d̄  |y, d̂     )                         ( k
                                                                                     d̄ |y, d̂      )
                                                                                                                                    (54)
                                                                                                               30


     e
with E
       (q−1)
                 containing
       k
                                             (q−1)
                                            
                                            ei                                     m=n
                               (q−1)                          ∗                
                               e
                               E           = Edi ,dj |y,d̂(q−2) di dj y, d̂ (q−2)
                                 k      mn  
                                             ˆ(q−1) ˆ(q−1) ∗                       m ̸= n
                                              −d        i  d  j

in the mth row and nth column, and the index mapping as defined above.

                                                    A PPENDIX B
 E STIMATES OF I TERATIVE S OFT I NTERFERENCE C ANCELLATION M ETHOD AFTER F IRST I TERATION
   We show for a QPSK modulation alphabet that the bit error probability of a hard decision estimate
produced by the iterative SIC method described in Sec. II-B after the first iteration is equivalent to the
bit error probability of an LMMSE hard decision estimate when initializing all data symbol estimates
of the iterative SIC method with 0, i.e., dˆk
                                                (−1)
                                                     = 0, k ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1}. To this end, we show that the
decision criteria of both estimation methods for the jth bit bjk of the kth data symbol, k ∈ {0, ..., Nd − 1},
j ∈ {0, ..., log2 (|S|) − 1}, being 0 or 1 are the same, and thus also their bit error probability must coincide.
The QPSK bit-to-symbol mapping (b1k b0k ) 7→ dk is assumed to map b0k to the real part and b1k to the
imaginary part √ of dk . The bit values 0 and 1 are mapped to the symbol values −ρ and ρ, respectively,
with ρ = 1/ 2 being an energy normalization factor.
   Let us start with the LMMSE data estimator. The SC-FDE system model is given by (cf. (5))
                                                       y = Hd + w ,                                         (55)
                       e and the corresponding LMMSE data estimator follows to
where w ∼ CN (0, N σn2 H),
                                                             
                                                           e −1 y ,
                               d̂ = σd2 HH σd2 HHH + N σn2 H                                                (56)
which is expressed in a different way as in (6), but can be shown to be mathematically equivalent. Based
on the LMMSE estimates dˆk , the hard decision estimate for bit b0k is
                                     (
                                      1 Pr(b0k = 1|dˆk ) > Pr(b0k = 0|dˆk )
                              b̂0k =                                        .                       (57)
                                      0 otherwise

It can be shown [55] that for the LMMSE estimator (56) and the model (55) Pr(b0k = 1|dˆk ) = κPr(b0k =
1|y) and Pr(b0k = 0|dˆk ) = κPr(b0k = 0|y), where κ is a proportionality constant. Hence, the condition
on dˆk in criterion (57) can be replaced by a condition on y, leading to a decision criterion
                                       (
                                        1 Pr(b0k = 1|y) > Pr(b0k = 0|y)
                                b̂0k =                                     .                       (58)
                                        0 otherwise
   By using the Bayesian rule and assuming a uniform prior PMF p[dk ], we can rearrange the criterion
in (58) to
                                        Pr(b0k = 1|y) > Pr(b0k = 0|y)
                                       X                 X
                                         p[dk = s′ |y] >      p[dk = s′ |y]
                                          (1)                          (0)
                                     s′ ∈S0                       s′ ∈S0
                                      X                            X
                                                p(y|dk = s′ ) >              p(y|dk = s′ ) ,                (59)
                                          (1)                          (0)
                                     s′ ∈S0                       s′ ∈S0

           (0)        (1)
where S0 and S0 are the sets of data symbols containing a bit with value 0 and 1 at the 0th position,
respectively. For determining the PDF p(y|dk = s′ ), we reformulate (55) as
                                                  y = H̄k d̄k + hk dk + w .                                 (60)
                                                                                                                31



Due to central limit theorem arguments, H̄k d̄k can be assumed to be Gaussian distributed, and thus p(y|dk )
is approximated to be a multivariate complex Gaussian PDF, i.e.,
                                                                                   
                         p(y|dk ) = ζy|dk exp − (y − µy|dk )H C−1
                                                                yy|dk (y − µy|dk
                                                                                 )   ,                 (61)
with the scaling factor ζy|dk = πN |C1yy|d | , the conditional mean
                                              k

                                                  µy|dk = E[y|dk ] = hk dk ,                                  (62)
and the conditional covariance matrix
                                                                           
                              Cyy|dk = Ck = E (y − µy|dk )(y − µy|dk )H |dk
                                                                             
                                          = E (H̄k d̄k + w)(H̄k d̄k + w)H |dk
                                                                e.
                                          = σ 2 H̄k H̄H + N σ 2 H                                             (63)
                                                       d               k               n

Since Cyy|dk = Ck does not depend on the realization of dk , the scaling factor ζy|dk is a constant for any
symbol s′ ∈ S. Consequently, by inserting (61) into (59) we arrive at the LMMSE hard decision criterion
                                     ( P                     P
                                                        ′                  ′
                                      1          (1) g(s ) >
                                            s′ ∈S0
                                                                    (0) g(s )
                                                               s′ ∈S0
                              b̂0k =                                          ,                        (64)
                                      0 otherwise
with
                                                                             
                                  g(s′ ) = exp − (y − hk s′ )H C−1         ′
                                                                k (y − hk s )                                 (65)
and Ck as defined in (63).
  Let us now consider the iterative SIC method, starting with the system model in its first iteration (q = 0),
which is given by
                                                                                   (0)
                                                      y = hk dk + vk ,                                        (66)
        (0)                                                                                             (0)
where vk = H̄k d̄k + w is assumed to be zero mean Gaussian noise with a covariance matrix Cvv,k =
                 2e
σd2 H̄k H̄H
          k + N σn H. The MMSE estimate for data symbol dk is the mean of the posterior PMF Edk |y [dk |y]
for the model (66), which is given by (cf. (18))
                                             P          ′            ′
                                                                       
                                                      s   p y dk = s
                                      dˆk = Ps ∈S
                                                 ′
                                                                                                    (67)
                                                                   ′
                                                 s′ ∈S p y dk = s
Considering the QPSK bit-to-symbol mapping defined above, the MMSE hard decision estimate for bit
b0k is
                                           (
                                            1 Re{dˆk } > 0
                                    b̂0k =                 .                                (68)
                                            0 otherwise
Since the denominator of the MMSE estimate given in (67) is always positive, the MMSE hard decision
estimate b̂0k is estimated to be 1 if
                                X ′                 
                         0 < Re       s p y dk = s ′
                                      s′ ∈S
                              X                                    
                          =           Re{s′ }p y dk = s′
                              s′ ∈S
                               X                              X                                             (69)
                          =               Re{s′ }p y dk = s′ +   Re{s′ }p y dk = s′
                              s′ ∈S (+)                                          s′ ∈S (-)
                                  X                                        X                      
                                                           ′
                          =ρ                p y dk = s − ρ                             p y dk = s ′ ,
                                s′ ∈S (+)                                  s′ ∈S (-)
                                                                                                                                     32



or, equivalently formulated, if
                                          X                       X            
                                                    p y dk = s ′ >   p y dk = s′ ,                                                (70)
                                        s′ ∈S (+)                    s′ ∈S (-)

with S (+) ⊂ S and S (−) ⊂ S being the sets of symbols containing solely symbols with positive and
negative real part, respectively. For the given QPSK bit-to-symbol mapping, these two sets of symbols
                                           (1)    (0)
S (+) and S (−) coincide with the sets S0 and S0 as defined above, respectively. The PDF p(y|dk ) for
the system model (66), in turn, is given by
                                                                 (0)−1            
                        p(y|dk ) = ζv(0) |d exp − (y − hk dk )H Cvv,k (y − hk dk ) ,             (71)
                                               k     k

                         1                                                                                 (0)
with ζv(0) |d =           (0)
                                 being constant for every data symbol realization and Cvv,k Ck = σd2 H̄k H̄H
                                                                                                           k +
         k    k     πN   Cvv,k
      e Combining (68), (70), and (71) leads to the MMSE hard decision criterion
N σn2 H.
                                                   ( P                 P
                                                                  ′                   ′
                                                    1  ′
                                                      s ∈S
                                                           (1) g(s ) >
                                                                         s′ ∈S
                                                                               (0) g(s )
                                       b̂0k =                  0                    0          ,                                  (72)
                                                     0 otherwise
with g(s′ ) as defined in (65). This is the same decision criterion as that of the LMMSE (64), which
concludes the proof.

                                                           R EFERENCES
 [1] S. Baumgartner, O. Lang, and M. Huemer, “A Soft Interference Cancellation Inspired Neural Network for SC-FDE,” in Proceedings
     of the 2022 IEEE 23rd International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communication (SPAWC), 2022, pp. 1–5.
 [2] B. Sagir, E. Aydin, and H. Ilhan, “Deep-Learning-Assisted IoT-Based RIS for Cooperative Communications,” IEEE Internet of Things
     Journal, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10 471–10 483, 2023.
 [3] X. Qian and M. Di Renzo, “Receiver Design in Molecular Communications: An Approach Based on Artificial Neural Networks,” in
     Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2018, pp. 1–5.
 [4] J. M. Mateos-Ramos, J. Song, Y. Wu, C. Häger, M. F. Keskin, V. Yajnanarayana, and H. Wymeersch, “End-to-End Learning for
     Integrated Sensing and Communication,” in Proceedings of 2022 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2022),
     2022, pp. 1942–1947.
 [5] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An Introduction to Deep Learning for the Physical Layer,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications
     and Networking, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, 2017.
 [6] F. Ait Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “Model-Free Training of End-to-End Communication Systems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
     Communications, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2503–2516, 2019.
 [7] H. He, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li, and Z. Xu, “Model-Driven Deep Learning for Physical Layer Communications,” IEEE
     Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77–83, 2019.
 [8] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and C. Studer, “Deep Unfolding for Communications Systems: A Survey and Some New Directions,” in
     2019 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), 2019, pp. 266–271.
 [9] J. Hoydis, F. Ait Aoudia, A. Valcarce, and H. Viswanathan, “Toward a 6G AI-Native Air Interface,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
     vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 76–81, 2021.
[10] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Power of Deep Learning for Channel Estimation and Signal Detection in OFDM Systems,” IEEE
     Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 114–117, 2018.
[11] Q. Hu, F. Gao, H. Zhang, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Deep Learning for Channel Estimation: Interpretation, Performance, and Comparison,”
     IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2398–2412, 2021.
[12] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep Learning Methods for Improved Decoding
     of Linear Codes,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, 2018.
[13] O. Ploder, C. Auer, C. Motz, T. Paireder, O. Lang, and M. Huemer, “SICNet—Low Complexity Sample Adaptive Neural Network-
     Based Self-Interference Cancellation in LTE-A/5G Mobile Transceivers,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 3,
     pp. 958–972, 2022.
[14] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, “Non-Linear Digital Self-Interference Cancellation for In-Band Full-Duplex Radios Using Neural Networks,”
     in 2018 IEEE 19th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[15] S. Baumgartner, C. Böck, M. Huemer, and A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, “Joint Self-Interference Cancellation and Data Estimation for
     OFDM Based Full-Duplex Communication Systems,” in Proceedings of the 57th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and
     Computers, 2023, accepted for publication.
[16] M. Mohammadkarimi, M. Mehrabi, M. Ardakani, and Y. Jing, “Deep Learning-Based Sphere Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
     Communications, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 4368–4378, 2019.
[17] K. Pratik, B. D. Rao, and M. Welling, “RE-MIMO: Recurrent and Permutation Equivariant Neural MIMO Detection,” IEEE Transactions
     on Signal Processing, vol. 69, pp. 459–473, 2021.
                                                                                                                                      33



[18] N. Samuel, T. Diskin, and A. Wiesel, “Learning to Detect,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 2554–2564,
     2019.
[19] H. He, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Model-Driven Deep Learning for MIMO Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
     vol. 68, pp. 1702–1715, 2020.
[20] J. Liao, J. Zhao, F. Gao, and G. Y. Li, “A Model-Driven Deep Learning Method for Massive MIMO Detection,” IEEE Communications
     Letters, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1724–1728, 2020.
[21] M. Khani, M. Alizadeh, J. Hoydis, and P. Fleming, “Adaptive Neural Signal Detection for Massive MIMO,” IEEE Transactions on
     Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 5635–5648, 2020.
[22] N. Shlezinger, N. Farsad, Y. C. Eldar, and A. J. Goldsmith, “ViterbiNet: A Deep Learning Based Viterbi Algorithm for Symbol
     Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3319–3331, 2020.
[23] N. Shlezinger, R. Fu, and Y. C. Eldar, “DeepSIC: Deep Soft Interference Cancellation for Multiuser MIMO Detection,” IEEE
     Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1349–1362, 2021.
[24] T. V. Luong, N. Shlezinger, C. Xu, T. M. Hoang, Y. C. Eldar, and L. Hanzo, “Deep Learning Based Successive Interference Cancellation
     for the Non-Orthogonal Downlink,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[25] Y. Wei, M. Zhao, M. Hong, M. Zhao, and M. Lei, “Learned Conjugate Gradient Descent Network for Massive MIMO Detection,” in
     Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2020), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[26] K. Hornik, “Approximation Capabilities of Multilayer Feedforward Networks,” Neural Networks, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 251–257, 1991.
[27] J. R. Hershey, J. Le Roux, and F. Weninger, “Deep unfolding: Model-based inspiration of novel deep architectures,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1409.2574, 2014.
[28] F. Pancaldi, G. M. Vitetta, R. Kalbasi, N. Al-Dhahir, M. Uysal, and H. Mheidat, “Single-Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization,”
     IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 37–56, 2008.
[29] M. Huemer, A. Koppler, R. Weigel, and L. Reindl, “A Review of Cyclically Extended Single Carrier Transmission with Frequency
     Domain Equalization for Broadband Wireless Transmission,” European Transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 329–
     341, 2003.
[30] M. Huemer, H. Witschnig, and J. Hausner, “Unique Word Based Phase Tracking Algorithms for SC/FDE-Systems,” in Proceedings of
     GLOBECOM 03 - IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2003, pp. 70–74.
[31] S. Baumgartner, O. Lang, and M. Huemer, “Neural Network Based Single-Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization,” in Computer Aided
     Systems Theory - EUROCAST 2022, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), 2023, pp. 295–302.
[32] W.-J. Choi, K.-W. Cheong, and J. M. Cioffi, “Iterative Soft Interference Cancellation for Multiple Antenna Systems,” in Proceedings
     of the 2000 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference. Conference Record, 2000, pp. 304–309.
[33] N. Shlezinger, R. Fu, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep Soft Interference Cancellation for MIMO Detection,” in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE
     International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 8881–8885.
[34] H. Witschnig, T. Mayer, A. Springer, L. Maurer, M. Huemer, and R. Weigel, “The Advantages of a Known Sequence Versus Cyclic
     Prefix in a SC/FDE System,” in Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications,
     vol. 3, 2002, pp. 1328–1332.
[35] M. Huemer, C. Hofbauer, and J. B. Huber, “Unique Word Prefix in SC/FDE and OFDM: A Comparison,” in 2010 IEEE Globecom
     Workshops, 2010, pp. 1296–1301.
[36] S. Reinhardt, T. Buzid, and M. Huemer, “Receiver Structures for MIMO-SC/FDE Systems,” in Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE 63rd
     Vehicular Technology Conference, 2006, pp. 1401–1405.
[37] M. Huemer, L. Reindl, A. Springer, and R. Weigel, “Implementation Aspects on Single Carrier Transmission with Frequency Domain
     Equalization,” in Proceedings of the 4th International OFDM Workshop, 1999, pp. 18.1 – 18.4.
[38] Y. Yang, T. Ihalainen, M. Rinne, and M. Renfors, “Frequency-Domain Equalization in Single-Carrier Transmission: Filter Bank
     Approach,” EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2007, pp. 1–16, 2007.
[39] S. Baumgartner, G. Bognár, O. Lang, and M. Huemer, “Neural Network Approaches for Data Estimation in Unique Word OFDM
     Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2023, early access.
[40] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory. Prentice Hall, 1993, vol. 1.
[41] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going Deeper with
     Convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[42] H. Xu, Y. Li, B. Tan, J. Wu, and D. Hu, “A Neural Network Empowered Belief Propagation Algorithm Optimized for Short-Cycles in
     Tanner Graph,” IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking, vol. 1, pp. 31–42, 2023.
[43] R. Wiesmayr, G. Marti, C. Dick, H. Song, and C. Studer, “Bit Error and Block Error Rate Training for ML-Assisted Communication,”
     in Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[44] M. Goutay, F. Ait Aoudia, and J. Hoydis, “Deep HyperNetwork-Based MIMO Detection,” in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 21st
     International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[45] Y. A. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K.-R. Müller, Efficient BackProp. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 9–48.
[46] C. M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford University Press, Inc., 1995.
[47] S. Baumgartner, G. Bognár, O. Lang, and M. Huemer, “Neural Network Based Data Estimation for Unique Word OFDM,” in Proceedings
     of the 55th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, USA, 2021.
[48] J. Fakatselis, “Criteria for 2.4 GHz PHY Comparison of Modulation,” IEEE Document, 1997, IEEE P802.11-97/157r1.
[49] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A Next-Generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework,” in
     Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019, pp. 2623–2631.
[50] M. Huemer and O. Lang, “On Component-Wise Conditionally Unbiased Linear Bayesian Estimation,” in Proceedings of the 48th
     Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Nov. 2014, pp. 879–885.
[51] M. Huemer, C. Hofbauer, and J. Huber, “The Potential of Unique Words in OFDM,” in Proceedings of the 15th International OFDM-
     Workshop, 2010, pp. 140–144.
                                                                                                                              34



[52] M. Huemer, C. Hofbauer, and J. B. Huber, “Non-Systematic Complex Number RS Coded OFDM by Unique Word Prefix,” IEEE
     Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 285–299, 2012.
[53] O. Lang, C. Böck, M. Huemer, and C. Hofbauer, “Increasing the Bandwidth Efficiency in UW-OFDM,” in Proceedings of the 53rd
     Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2019, pp. 1857–1861.
[54] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.
[55] W. Haselmayr and A. Springer, “Extrinsic LLR Computation by the SISO LMMSE Detector: Four Different Approaches,” in Computer
     Aided Systems Theory – EUROCAST 2015, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), 2015, pp. 529–536.
